BOOK 1

LANDFALL AT CARTHAGE

My song is of war and a man: a refugee by fate,
the first from Troy to Italy’s Lavinian shores,
battered much on land and sea by blows from gods
obliging brutal Juno’s unforgetting rage;
he suffered much in war as well, all to plant
his town and gods in Latium. From here would rise
the Latin race, the Alban lords, and Rome’s high walls.
Remember for me, Muse. Tell me the reasons. What pain,
what insult to her power, moved the queen of gods
10 to drive a man famous for piety* through misery
on misery? Can such anger grip gods’ minds?
An ancient city built by colonists from Tyre
faced Italy and Tiber’s mouth across the sea:
wealthy Carthage, fierce and fond of waging war.
They say that Juno loved her best; even Samos
came in second. Here the goddess kept her weapons
and her chariot; this land would rule the world
if fate allowed. This was her aim and hope.
But she’d heard that men of Trojan blood
20 would topple Carthage and her heights one day.
They’d be a people proud in war, an empire
51

fatal for her Libya. This was what the Fates had
spun, this was Juno’s fear. She remembered
how she’d fought at Troy to help her cherished Greeks.
Still other reasons for her rage and bile
remained deep-rooted in her heart: Paris’ scornful
verdict on her beauty, the honors paid by Jove
to kidnapped Ganymede, her hatred for that race.*
Enflamed by this, she barred from Latium
30 the sea-tossed Trojans, the few left by the Greeks
and cruel Achilles. They roamed for many years,
over many oceans, forced on by the Fates.
To found the Roman race required such great effort.
Sicily had slipped from sight. The Trojans gladly
sailed for open sea, their bronze prows churning foam.
But Juno, nursing her eternal wound, thought
to herself: “Am I to leave off from my plan
and fail to turn the Trojan king from Italy?
It seems that Fate forbids it. Then how could Pallas
40 burn the Argive fleet and drown its crew, just to
punish the mad crime of Ajax, son of Oïleus?*
On her own, she hurled Jove’s* lightning from the clouds,
wrecked the ships, and whipped up waves with wind;
she grabbed up Ajax in a gust and spiked him on sharp
reefs—the man puffed fire from his punctured chest!
But me, the queen of all the gods, Jove’s wife
and sister too, for years I’ve had to fight
against a single race! Now who’ll worship me
or put gifts on my altars as a supplicant?”
50 Her hot heart fixed on these thoughts, Queen Juno reached

52

Aeolia, a land that teemed with storms and clouds.
In his colossal cave, King Aeolus
ruled the warring winds and howling gales
and locked them up inside. They roared around the latches
outraged. Over them, the mountain murmured
mightily. Aeolus, sitting in his stronghold,
scepter in his hand, soothed their angry spirits.
Otherwise, they’d seize the oceans, lands,
and deepest sky, and blast them all away.
60 It was this fear that made the mighty Father
hide them in a lightless cave and heap mountains
on top. He chose a king who swore he’d curb
the winds or free their reins as he was told.
Now Juno came to wheedle him: “Aeolus,
the father of the gods and king of men
chose you to calm the waves or whip them up with wind.
A race I hate travels the Tuscan sea:
they bring the beaten gods of Troy to Italy.
Rouse the winds to gale-force, sink the ships,
70 or scatter them and fling the crew into the sea.
In my retinue are fourteen gorgeous nymphs;
Deiopea is the loveliest of all. She’s yours—
just do me this favor. I’ll join you both
in lasting marriage, so she’ll spend her years
with you and make you father to fair children.”
Aeolus said: “Your task, O Queen, is to know
your wish and will; mine, to make it happen.
Thanks to you, I have this little kingdom
and Jupiter’s goodwill, I dine with gods,
80 I’m master of the storms and wild weather.”
53

Saying this, he struck the hollow mountain
with the butt-end of his spear. A battle-line
of winds rushed out the rift and swept over the lands.
Notus, Eurus, and Africus, full of storms,*
settled on the sea as one and churned it
from its bed; they rolled huge waves to shore.
Next came the shouts of men, the shriek of ropes.
At once, storm-clouds snatched the sky from sight.
Black night brooded on the sea. The heavens
90 thundered, frequent flashes tore the dark.
All signs warned the men that death had come.
At once Aeneas’ knees buckled with chill.
He groaned and held up both hands to the stars:
“Three and four times fortunate, all you who died
by Troy’s high walls under your fathers’ gaze!
O Diomedes, bravest of the Greeks!
I wish I’d fallen on Troy’s fields, my blood spilled
by your strong right hand, where fierce Hector perished
on Achilles’ spear, and huge Sarpedon too;
100 where Simoïs rolls in its stream so many shields
and helmets, so many bodies of the brave.”
As he spoke, the howling north wind hit the sails
head-on and pushed the sea up to the stars.
The oars snapped and the ship swung broadside
to the waves; a wall of water crashed on deck.
Some sailors hung on crests, some saw seabed
as each wave loomed up. The sea boiled with sand.
Notus snatched three ships and hurled them onto reefs
that lurked mid-sea, the ones Italians call Altars,
54

110 huge spines near the surface. Eurus drove

three boats into the shoals, a sorry sight, and smashed
them on the rocks. Sand built up around them.
Before Aeneas’ eyes, a giant wave broke on
the ship of good Orontes and his Lycians.
It threw the helmsman off the deck headfirst into
wild waters. Eddies spun the ship around
three times, then the raging undertow engulfed it.
A few men surfaced in the vast abyss. Weapons,*
planks, and Trojan treasure floated in the waves.
120 The storm seized Ilioneus’ sturdy ship,
brave Achates’ ship, Abas’ ship, and old
Aletes’ ship. They all let in fatal water
through the hulls’ loose seams and gaping cracks.
Now Neptune sensed the sea’s chaos and clamor,
the storm Aeolus sent. He felt the churning
of the sluggish waters of the deep. Perplexed,
he raised his peaceful face and scanned the sea.
He saw Aeneas’ wave-tossed ships, the Trojans
swamped by swells and the ruin of the sky.
130 Juno’s angry treachery was clear to him.
He called Eurus and Zephyrus,* and said to them:
“Is it your noble birth that makes you bold?
You winds now dare to mingle sky and earth
and stir up waves without permission? Why,
I should—But first I’ll soothe the wild sea. Then
you’ll get what you deserve, and it won’t be in words!
Get out of here, now, and tell your king:
rule over the sea and savage trident’s mine
55

by lot, not his. His kingdom is the cave
140 where you live, Eurus. Let him strut in that court
and rule there—once his winds are jailed.”
Faster than his words, Neptune soothed the swells,
routed huddled clouds, brought back the sun.
Cymothoe and Triton pried the ships off crags;
Neptune helped them with his trident. He cleared
pathways through long shoals and calmed the sea,
skimming wave-crests lightly in his chariot.
Just as riots often fester in great crowds
when the common mob goes mad; rocks and
150 firebrands fly, the weapons rage supplies;*
but if they see a man of weight in piety
and service, they hush and wait to hear him;
he guides their minds and soothes their hearts with words—
just so, all the tumult of the sea died down
once Neptune scanned the waters. He turned his team
and let them run free under cloudless skies.*
Aeneas’ tired crew fights to reach the nearest
shore; they bend toward the Libyan coast.
There, an island’s deep bay forms a harbor
160 with its sides. Every wave from the high sea
is broken here and fans out to the curving coves.
On both sides sheer cliffs and matching crags
menace the sky, but underneath, safe pools
lie wide and still. Above, a rustling forest
sets the scene, dark with trembling shade.
A cave with rocky overhangs faces the front.
It has freshwater pools and stones for seats,
56

the home of nymphs. Here no cables tie
the weary boats, no anchor bites the sand.
170 Aeneas enters with his ships, seven
left from all the fleet. With great love for land,
the Trojans reach the shore they craved, disembark,
and rest their sodden limbs on sand. Achates
is the first to strike a spark from flint.
He kindles fire with leaves and sets dry fodder
on the flames, then feeds the blaze with twigs.
Weary from their wandering, they fetch the pots
and spoiled grain they rescued from the waves, then dry
the food with fire and crush it under stone.
180 Meanwhile Aeneas scales a cliff, and scans

the spread of ocean, wondering if he’d perhaps see
some Trojan ships, sea-tossed Antheus, Capys,
or Caicus’ shield attached to a high stern.
There’s no ship in sight, but three stags stray
along the shore. Behind them come whole herds
of deer, the long line grazing through the gorge.
He stops and grabs his bow and flying shafts,
the weapons loyal Achates holds for him.
First he drops the leading stags, whose antlers
190 branch on heads held high. Then he drives
the panicked herd all through the leafy woods.
He only stops after he’s vanquished seven
massive beasts, the number of his ships.
Back at port, he splits the meat among his crew
and shares the wine which kind Acestes poured
in heavy jars when they left Sicily—
a hero’s gift—and comforts their sad hearts.
57

“My friends: we’re no strangers to misfortune.
You’ve suffered worse; some god will end this too.
200 You slipped past savage Scylla and her crags that rang
with barks, you saw the Cyclops’ rocks. Be brave,
let go your fear and despair. Perhaps someday
even memory of this will bring you pleasure.
Through good times and bad, through many trials,
we make for Latium.* There the fates
promise us rest; there Troy must rise again.
Hold on. Save your strength for better days to come.”
So he says. Though he’s sick with crushing cares,
he feigns hope on his face* and clamps down his deep pain.
210 They prepare the game, their future feast,
hacking hide from ribs, laying bare the guts.
Some slice the quivering meat to thread on spits,
some set cauldrons on the shore and tend the fires.
Sprawling on the grass, they restore their strength
with food, gorging on old wine and fatty game.
Once their hunger’s sated and the dishes cleared,
they ask after lost friends, talking at length,
wavering between hope and fear—are they alive,
or have they met their end, now deaf to any calls?
220 Pious Aeneas* grieves the most, but secretly:
for keen Orontes’ fate, for Amycus, for Lycus’
cruel death, for brave Gyas, brave Cloanthus.
Now their grief was done. Jupiter looked down
from heaven’s height onto the sail-swept sea,
the lands and shores and far-flung folk. From his
lofty seat, he fixed his gaze on Libya.
58

And as he dwelled on his concerns, sad Venus,
her eyes wet with shiny tears, came to him.
“You who rule the lives of gods and men,
230 a terror with your thunderbolts, what did
my Aeneas and the Trojans—so many
dead already—ever do to you? All lands
are closed to them on Italy’s account.
You promised once that they’d give rise to Romans,
that in the circling years leaders would rise
from Teucer’s blood to rule the land and sea.
Father, what made you change your mind? This was
my consolation for Troy’s fall and tragic ruin
when I weighed one fate against the other.
240 Now the same curse hounds them, after all
their suffering! Great king, has their pain no end?
Antenor could dodge the Greeks at Troy, reach
Adriatic shores in safety, and travel deep
into Liburnia. He saw Timavus’ source,
where the sea comes inland through nine paths
and bursts out noisily, engulfing fields with surf.
He founded Padua, a home for Teucrians,
gave his citizens a name and put away
his Trojan armor. Now he lives in peace, retired.
250 But we, your blood! You promised us the heights of heaven,
then betrayed us to a single female’s rage.
Our ships are lost and we’re kept far from Italy.
This is our prize for piety? This, our triumph?”

Smiling at her with the look that calms the sky
59

and storms, the forefather of gods and men
gently kissed his daughter and replied:
“Let go your fear, Cytherea. Your people’s fate
remains unchanged: you’ll see Lavinium and
its promised walls, you’ll raise great-souled Aeneas
260 to the stars. I haven’t changed my mind.
Since this worry gnaws at you, I’ll tell you more,
and unroll the secrets of the fates. Your son
will wage wide war in Italy, subdue
ferocious tribes, and give them walls and customs.*
After the Latins lose, Aeneas will be king
in Latium three summers and three winters.
His son Ascanius, now called Iülus
(he was Ilus during Ilium’s reign)
will rule for thirty cycling years of cycling
270 months. He’ll move Lavinium’s seat of power
and strengthen Alba Longa with high walls.*
Here, when Hector’s line has ruled three hundred
years, the priestess Ilia, pregnant by Mars,
will have his twins.* Romulus, clad in his foster
mother’s tawny wolf-pelt, will gladly lead
his people. With Mars’ help, he’ll build Rome’s
walls and name the Romans for himself.
On them I set no boundaries of time or space:
I’ve granted empire without end. Even cruel
280 Juno, terror of the land and sea and sky,
will change her plans and (like me) favor Romans:
people of the toga, rulers of the world.
So I’ve decreed. As years slip by, an age
will come when Assaracus’ house will conquer
Argos and crush Phthia and famed Mycenae.*
60

Trojan Caesar* will be born, of lovely Venus’ line,
whose rule will reach all shores, his fame the stars
—Julius, a name passed down from great Iülus.
Freed from worry, you’ll greet him in the skies.
290 He’ll come laden with Eastern spoils, and men will pray
to him; harsh centuries of war will cease.
Ancient Trust and Vesta, Remus and Quirinus
will set down laws; the awful iron Gates of War
will close. Inside, impious Rage, crouched on
brutal weapons, tied up with a hundred knots
of bronze, will roar from blood-stained jaws.”
Now Jupiter sent Mercury, the son of Maia,
to make sure the lands and citadel of Carthage
would greet the Trojans kindly, and so Dido,
300 blind to fate, would not drive them off. He flew
across the width of sky, sweeping wings like oars,
and soon reached Libya. He did his task: the people
quelled their fierce hearts; the queen especially
took up a calm and kindly view of Trojans.
Pious Aeneas worried greatly through the night.
When gentle dawn appeared, he decided to explore
this unknown land, to find out where he’d sailed
and learn who lived there, animals or men—
what he saw looked wild. Then he’d bring back news.
310 He hid the fleet inside an inlet hemmed
by woods, close to overhanging cliffs,
among the quivering shade of trees. Then he left
with two broad-bladed spears, Achates at his side.

61

His mother met him in mid-forest, with a young girl’s
face and dress. She had weapons that a Spartan
girl might carry, or Harpalyce of Thrace,
who tires horses and outruns the rushing river
Hebrus. Huntress-like,* she’d slung a handy bow
across her back. Her hair streamed on the wind,
320 her knees were bare, a knot held up her dress’s folds.
Meeting them, she asked: “Young men, did you
chance on any of my sisters roaming here
in a lynx’s dappled hide, holding a quiver,
or shouting on the heels of a foaming boar?”
Venus’ son replied to her as follows:
“I haven’t seen or heard a trace of them.
But how should I address you? Your face and voice
do not seem mortal. Goddess—as you must be—
are you Apollo’s sister? Does nymph-blood run in you?
330 I hope that seeing you will ease our hardship.
What skies are these, where on earth have we washed up?
Tell us. We don’t know this place or people.
We’re wanderers, and driven by the winds and tides.
My hand will offer many victims at your altars.”
But Venus said: “I don’t deserve such honor.
We Tyrian girls all sport a quiver, we all tie
the laces of our purple boots high on our shins.
You see a Punic colony, Agenor’s men.
But Libya, unsubdued in battle, borders us.
340 Dido of Tyre is our queen: she left her home
fleeing her own brother. It’s a long and complex
tale of wrong, but here’s the gist of it:*
62

Sychaeus, Dido’s husband, had more land
than any Tyrian. Poor Dido loved him greatly.
Her father married them when she was still a virgin.
But Pygmalion, her brother—a prodigy
of evil!—was the king. Some mad feud estranged
the men, and her impious brother, blind with lust
for gold, caught and killed Sychaeus at the altar,
350 indifferent to his sister’s love. For long that swine
concealed his crime. He tricked the heartsick wife
with empty hope and spun her many tales.
But in her dreams, her husband’s ghost appeared to her
unburied, raising his pale and eerie face.
He showed her the cruel altar and his pierced
chest and told her of the evil hidden in their
home. He urged her to depart their land at once,
and revealed a treasure buried long ago—
an unknown weight of gold and silver—for the trip.
360 Shaken, Dido planned escape, selected friends.
Those who loathed or feared the tyrant gathered.
They seized whatever ships were ready, loading them
with gold. The riches that the greedy man had craved
voyaged the sea, and a woman led the act!
They reached this place where you now see great walls
and the growing stronghold of new Carthage,
a region they call Byrsa from their purchase—
as much land as a bull’s-hide cut in strips could circle.*
But who are you, what country are you from,
370 where do you head?” Aeneas answered with a sigh,
and drew his words from deep inside his heart:
“Goddess, if I traced my story from the start
63

and you had time to hear the history of our pain,
the Evening Star would close the day and heaven’s gates.
We come from what was Troy—perhaps its name has reached
your ears? But as we traveled many seas, a storm
drove us to Libya’s coast by chance. I’m pious
Aeneas. On my fleet, I carry gods saved
from the enemy; my fame reaches the sky,
380 my blood is Jove’s. I head for Italy, our home.
I launched twenty ships upon the Phrygian sea,
following fate, and my mother showed the way.
Just seven ships survive, lashed by wind and waves.
And I—I roam the Libyan desert, unknown, beggared,
spurned by East and West.” Venus was annoyed
by these complaints, and she cut his laments short.
“I doubt the gods despise you, whoever you may be.
You breathe the air, you’re near a Tyrian town.
Continue, and you’ll reach the palace of the queen.
390 I have some news: your friends are safe,* your fleet
is here, blown by shifting winds—unless
my parents taught me augury in vain.
See those twelve swans gladly flying in formation?
Jove’s great eagle plunged from open skies
and scattered them. Now, regrouped, they land
in a long line, or gaze at those who’ve landed.
Just as they’ve returned, flapping their wings
in play, wheeling round the sky with honks,
so too your ships and men have entered port
400 or now approach the harbor with full sail.
Keep on, and follow where the trail leads.”

64

As she turned away, her neck gleamed rosily,
her ambrosial hair gave off a divine scent
and her robes grew longer, flowing to her feet.
Her gait too revealed the goddess. But Aeneas,
when he recognized his mother, called to her:
“Why trick your son so often with disguises?*
You’re as cruel as the other gods. Why can’t I
ever hold your hand in mine, or speak frankly?”
410 Grumbling so, he turned his steps to town.

As they went, Venus veiled them in dark mist
and draped them with a heavy cloak of cloud,
so no one could see or stumble on them,
or cause delay or ask why they were there.
She herself went up to Paphos, happy to
go home, where her temple’s hundred altars
were fragrant with fresh wreaths and warm with incense.
Meanwhile they hurried on along the path.
They climbed a hill that steeply overhung
420 the town, and looked down on the citadel.
Aeneas admired its size (once it had mere huts),
its gates, the hubbub and the cobbled streets.
One group worked to raise the walls and fortify
the citadel; they rolled up rocks by hand.
Some shaped homesteads, circling them with trenches,
or chose a sacred senate, laws and offices.
Here men hollowed out a harbor; there they laid down
bedrock for a theater, and hacked tall columns
out of cliffs to ornament a future stage.
430 They were like busy bees in fields of flowers
65

in the early summer, when they lead out
their grown young or cram the combs with honey
and swell them with sweet nectar, or unload
returning bees, or join in ranks to drive
the idle throng of drones off from their hives.
The work hums along, the honey smells of thyme.
“Lucky you, whose walls are rising now,”
cried Aeneas as he stared up at the rooftops.
Fenced around by mist, he walked the crowded streets.
440 Amazingly, he mixed with them and no one saw.
The city center held a thickly shaded grove
where the Tyrians, tossed by storms at sea,
had first dug up the omen Juno spoke of,
a stallion’s head—meaning they’d be a race
unmatched in war and prosperous through the ages.
Here, Dido of Tyre was building Juno a huge
temple, rich in gifts, rich in her godly presence.
At the entry rose bronze stairs, the doorposts too
were bronze, the door creaked on bronze hinges.
450 In this grove first, a sight appeared that eased
Aeneas’ fear and let him dare to dream
of safety, to have more hope in troubled times.*
As he scanned each detail of the giant temple,
waiting for the queen, and admired the city’s
fortune and its craftsmen’s skill and work, he saw
the stages of the Trojan War, the battles blazoned
by their fame across the world, Atreus’s
sons, King Priam, and Achilles cruel to both.
He stopped in tears: “Achates, what place on earth,
460 what land isn’t steeped in what we’ve suffered? Look:
66

it’s Priam. Here too, glory has rewards;
the world weeps, and mortal matters move the heart.
Let go your fear. This fame will bring some safety.”
He spoke, and fed his soul on empty images,
sighing heavily. Tears streamed down his face.
He saw the men who fought by Pergamum.
Here, Greeks fled as Trojan youths pursued.
There, the Phrygians ran, and plumed Achilles chased them
in his chariot. He recognized in tears
470 Rhesus’ snowy tents. Bloody Diomedes
had killed these men, whose deep sleep was their downfall,
and taken Rhesus’ high-strung horses to his camp
before they tasted Trojan grass or Xanthus’ stream.*
Here Troilus tried to get away, his armor lost—
poor boy, no equal to Achilles in a fight.
His horses dragged him on his back; tangled with
the chariot, he still held the reins. His neck
and hair trailed on the ground, his spear-butt scored the dust.
Meanwhile Trojan women, hair unbound, headed
480 with a robe to the temple of Athena.
Sad supplicants, they beat their breasts, but
the hostile goddess kept her eyes fixed on the ground.
Achilles had dragged Hector round the walls of Troy
three times, and now he hawked his corpse for gold.
Aeneas groaned deep in his heart, when he saw
the spoils, the chariot, the very body of his
friend,* and Priam stretching out defenseless hands.
He saw himself as well, mixed in with the Greeks,*
and the Eastern army, and black Memnon’s spears.
490 Penthesilea led the crescent-shielded
67

Amazons, a fighter-queen afire and ardent
in the crush. A golden sword-belt crossed below
her naked breast, a virgin dared to fight with men.
While these wonders held Aeneas’ gaze,
while he stared at each sight riveted,
beautiful Queen Dido came into the temple,
a retinue of soldiers packed around her.
Like Diana leading dances on Eurotas’
banks or Cynthus’ peaks, surrounded by
500 a thousand mountain nymphs, a quiver on her back
—she’s the tallest of the goddesses around her,
and Latona’s heart is pierced with silent joy—
so Dido gladly went among her people,
tending to the building of her future kingdom.
Under the temple’s vaulted roof, facing the doors,
she sat on her high throne, fenced in with spears,
giving laws and statutes to the men, assigning
the work fairly or setting tasks by lot.
Suddenly Aeneas saw, as they pushed through
510 a great mob, Antheas, brave Cloanthus and
Segestus, with the other Trojans whom black storms
had flung apart at sea and driven to far shores.
Aeneas was stunned; Achates, struck by joy
and fear. They were keen to greet their friends,
but these events unnerved them. They stayed concealed,
veiled in hollow mist, to hear the men’s news.
Where were their crews moored? Why were they here?
—since in the clamor, envoys picked from all the ships
were coming to the shrine to ask for help.

68

520 When they’d entered and had leave to speak,

the eldest, Ilioneus, calmly began:
“Queen, whom Jupiter allowed to build a city
and to curb proud tribes with laws, we wretched
Trojans, tossed by storms on every sea,
plead with you to save our ships from hungry flames.
See what state we’re in and spare a pious race.
We don’t come to plunder Libyan homes
with swords or divert stolen booty to the shore:
such brutal arrogance is not in beaten hearts!
530 There’s a place the Greeks have named Hesperia,
an ancient land, strong in war and rich in soil.
The Oenotri settled it. Rumor says
their children call themselves ‘Italian’ from
their leader’s name. This was our heading when Orion’s
storms and sudden tides drove us onto lurking
shoals and swamped us. The insolent south wind
scattered us through waves and hidden rocks.
Now a few of us have drifted to your shores.
What race is this? What land’s so barbaric that it
540 sanctions this behavior? We’re kept away from shore
by threats of war. We can’t set foot on land.
If you scorn humans and their weapons, at least
assume the gods know justice and injustice!
We had a king, Aeneas. No one was more just
or pious, nor more powerful in battle.
If fate preserves him and he breathes the air,
not yet sleeping with the cruel shades below,
we’re not afraid. You’d be proud to match
his kindness. Sicily too has towns and fields
69

550 for us. Our kinsman lives there, famed Acestes.

Let us haul ashore our wind-lashed vessels,
saw planks out of trees and bind together oars.
If we can sail for Italy with king and crew,
then we’ll gladly make for Latium there.
If there’s no hope, and Libyan waters hold Aeneas,
best of Trojans, and Iülus too is gone,
we’ll return to the Sicilian straits, the homes
we built and left behind, and king Acestes.”
This was Ilioneus’ speech. All the
560 Dardans roared assent to it as one.
Dido answered briefly, her eyes downcast:
“Trojans, let go your fear and your worries.
Harsh necessity and my new kingdom force me
to be careful and to post guards on the borders.
Who doesn’t know Aeneas’ race, or Troy,
Trojan courage, and the flames of that great war?
We Punics don’t have minds so dull; when the Sun-god
yokes his team, he doesn’t shun our city.
If you hope for broad Hesperia and Saturn’s
570 fields, or king Acestes and the land of Eryx,
I’ll provide safe passage and help you with supplies.
If you wish to settle here alongside me,
the city that I’m building’s yours. Beach your ships.
Both Tyrians and Trojans will be the same to me.
How I wish your king Aeneas were here, driven
by the same south wind! I’ll send out trusty scouts
along the shores and have them scour all Libya,
in case he’s shipwrecked near our woods and towns.”
70

Brave Achates and father Aeneas, encouraged
580 by these words, had long been keen to breach
the mist around them. Achates urged Aeneas first:
“Goddess-born, what thoughts surge in you now?
You see that all is safe, the fleet and crew are here.
One man’s absent, whom we ourselves saw drowning
in the sea. The rest is as your mother said.”
He’d hardly spoken, when at once the cloud
around them parted, melting into open air.
There stood Aeneas, gleaming in the clear light,
godlike in his face and shoulders: the goddess
590 Venus had graced her son with flowing hair,
the glowing skin of youth, and shining eyes:
the way skill transforms ivory to art, the way
a golden bezel sets off marble or plain silver.
His appearance startled everyone. At once
he spoke to Dido: “I’m here—the one you asked about,
Aeneas of Troy, plucked from Libyan waters.
O Queen, only you have ached for Troy’s ordeal
and shared with us your town and home—we few
left by the Greeks, worn out on land and sea
600 by every blow, bereft.* We don’t have means
to offer fitting thanks, nor do the remnants
of the Trojans scattered through the world.
May the gods—if they honor pious men,
if there’s justice anywhere, and conscience,
—reward you in kind. What lucky ages
bore you? What parents had a child like you?
While rivers flow to seas and shadows cross
71

the mountain slopes, while sky pastures the stars,
your honor and your name and praise will last
610 for me, whatever country calls.” He grasped the hands
of Ilioneus and Serestus, right and left,
then others, brave Cloanthus and brave Gyas.

Dido was left speechless at the sight of him
and all his suffering. She asked, “What ill luck
drives you through such danger, goddess-born?
What force brings you to these arid coasts?
Are you that Aeneas, the son of kindly Venus
and Anchises, born next to Simoïs at Troy?
I do remember Teucer* came to Sidon once,
620 exiled from his country, looking for new lands
with Belus’ help. My father then was sacking
wealthy Cyprus—he’d just conquered it.
Since then I’ve known about the fall of Troy,
your name, and the Pelasgian kings. Teucer himself,
though your enemy, praised the Trojans highly.
He claimed he came from ancient Trojan stock.
So come, young men, enter my home. Fortune once
harassed me with hardship like your own. At last,
the fates let me settle in this land. Knowing
630 pain, I can learn to help the pain of others.”
As she led Aeneas to her royal halls,
she called for sacrifice in honor of the gods.
Just as thoughtfully, she sent the sailors
on the shore twenty bulls and one hundred
72

giant boars with bristling backs, a hundred fatty
lambs and ewes. The gods rejoiced at the gifts.*
Inside, the palace was prepared with regal splendor
and the feast was set out in the center. There were
cloths embroidered skillfully in purple,
640 silver vessels on the tables, and, engraved
in gold, her ancestors’ brave deeds, a lengthy list
of countless heroes’ exploits since her people’s start.

Paternal love did not allow Aeneas to rest.
He sent Achates quickly to the ships to tell
Ascanius the news and bring him to the city.
As a father, all his care was for his cherished
son. He also told Achates to bring presents
saved from ruined Troy: a cloak stiff with golden
thread, a veil edged with saffron-dyed acanthus—
650 Argive Helen’s finery, taken from Mycenae
when she left for Troy and her illicit marriage,
her mother Leda’s gorgeous gifts. Also,
a scepter that once belonged to Priam’s
eldest daughter, Ilione, a necklace set
with pearls, a crown ringed twice with gold and gems.
Achates headed for the ships, wasting no time.
But Venus was reflecting on new plans and plots:
how Amor could change his looks and take the place
of sweet Ascanius, sparking the queen to madness
660 with his gifts, folding flames into her marrow.
She feared a dual house and fork-tongued Tyrians,
73

and Juno’s cruelty chafed at her. With night, her cares
returned. So she addressed her son, winged Amor:
“My son, my strength, my refuge, the one source
of my power, who scorns the giant-slaying bolts
of Jupiter, I beg you as a supplicant.
You’re aware of how Aeneas, your half-brother,
is harassed on land and sea by jealous Juno’s
rage, and you’ve often grieved over my grief.
670 Now Phoenician Dido has him; she delays him
with her flattery. I fear how Juno’s welcome
will turn out—she won’t be slow to seize her chance.
My plan is to outwit her. I’ll circle Dido
with a blaze beyond the reach of any god.
She’ll be mine, bound by deep love for Aeneas.
Hear my thoughts on how to do this. The prince,
my greatest care, now leaves for Sidon’s colony
at his loving father’s call, with gifts
the sea and Trojan flames did not destroy.
680 I’ll put the boy to sleep and hide him high
on Cythera, or in my holy shrine in Cyprus,
so he won’t know the scheme or stumble on it.
Take his shape for just one night. Boy for boy,
craftily put on his well-known face, so that
when delighted Dido takes you on her lap
while wine flows at the royal feast, while she holds you,
planting her sweet kisses on you, you’ll breathe
hidden flames and secret poison into her.”
Amor listened to his dear mother, took off
690 his wings, and gladly tried out Iülus’ gait.
Venus poured calm sleep into Ascanius
74

and took him, warm in her embrace, up to
her shrine’s high groves, where gentle marjoram
surrounded him with flowers and sweet shade.
Now Amor left as told, gladly taking regal
presents to the Tyrians. Achates led him.
He found Dido sitting in the central hall
on a golden couch with splendid rugs.
And now Aeneas and the Trojan men arrived.
700 They reclined on purple coverings.
Slaves fetched water for their hands, set out
bread in baskets, and offered silky napkins.
Fifty female house-slaves were in back, to keep
the larder stocked and orderly, and tend
the fires. Two hundred other men and women,
matched in age, brought out the food and goblets.
Tyrians came too, crowding through the festive
threshold, invited to recline on ornate couches.
They admired Aeneas’ gifts and they admired
710 “Iülus,” the god’s bright face and lying words.*
Poor Dido above all, marked for future ruin,
couldn’t sate her soul; the sight set her on fire.
The boy, the presents, charmed her equally.
Iülus hugged Aeneas and clung to him, filling
his false father’s heart with love. Then he sought out
the queen. Her eyes, her heart were fixed on him,
she stroked him on her lap—unhappy Dido,
not knowing the trap the great god laid. Mindful
720 of his mother, Amor bit by bit erased
Sychaeus, trying to revive new love
in a heart so long asleep, so long unused.
75

At the first lull in the feast, tables were cleared,
great wine-jars set up and ringed with wreaths.
The house was filled with noise; voices ricocheted
around the vaulted halls. Lighted lamps hung from
gold chains; the tapers’ flames routed the night.
The queen called for a bowl heavy with gems and gold,
which Belus and his heirs had always used.
730 She poured in unmixed wine. A hush fell as she prayed.
“Jupiter, they say you set the laws for hosts.
May this day be glad for those from Troy
and for the Tyrians; let our children mind it.
May Bacchus who brings joy attend, and good Juno.
Tyrians, honor and support our union.”
Dido poured a gift of wine upon the altar,
the first to touch the goblet to her lips,
then challenged Bitias. No slouch, he drank
the foaming cup, swilling from the gold.
740 Next, the other princes. Long-haired Iöpas,
great Atlas’ pupil, plucked his gilded lyre.
He sang of lunar cycles, eclipses of the sun,
the origins of man and beast and rain and fire,
the star Arcturus, the wet Hyades and twin
Bears, why winter suns are quick to dip
into the Ocean, what makes cold nights linger.
The Tyrians doubled their applause, the Trojans too.
Doomed Dido too was drawing out the night
with varied talk, but the cup she drained was love.
750 She had many questions: about Hector, Priam,
the armor Memnon had when he arrived,
Diomedes’ horses* and Achilles’ strength.
“Better yet: tell us from the start, my guest,
76

the story of Greek treachery, your people’s ruin,
and your travels: it’s the seventh summer now
that you’ve roamed through all the lands and seas.”

77

BOOK 2

AENEAS’ STORY: THE FALL OF TROY

They all fell silent, fixing their eyes on Aeneas.
From his seat of honor, he began: “Queen,
you ask me to relive an anguish beyond words:
how the Greeks destroyed Troy’s kingdom and her wealth.
I saw the piteous events myself—I played
no minor part. Which of cruel Ulysses’ men,
what Dolopian or Myrmidon could speak
of it dry-eyed? Meanwhile damp night hurries
from the sky, the setting stars urge us to sleep.
10 But if you long so much to learn of our ordeal,
to hear in brief the tale of Troy’s last throes,
I’ll speak, though I shudder to recall it and
recoil in grief.
Broken by war, snubbed by fate,
the Greek leaders had seen many years slip by.
They built a giant horse with the help of Pallas’
skill, interweaving ribs with planks of pine.
They claimed it was an offering for their safe return;
that rumor spread. But they filled the horse’s hidden
flanks with soldiers picked by lot: the massive
20 womb was packed with warriors and weapons.*

78

There’s an island, Tenedos, in sight of Troy—
famed and wealthy once, while Priam’s Troy still stood.
Now it’s just a bay with treacherous mooring.
The Greeks sail there and hide on a deserted beach.
We think they’ve left, sailing for Mycenae
on the wind. All Troy shakes off her lengthy grief.
The gates are opened and we go with joy to see
the empty Doric camps, the deserted shore.
Here there’d been Dolopians and cruel Achilles’
30 tent! The fleet moored there, there the front lines fought!
Some gape at the gift (our ruin!) to unwed
Athena, amazed at its size. Thymoetes
urges us to bring it in and set it on
the citadel. Perhaps this is treason, perhaps
our destiny. Capys, and anyone with sense,
says to hurl this trap, this suspect gift of Greeks,
into the sea, or set a fire under it,
or bore into its hollow womb to probe inside.
The crowd is undecided; we split into two camps.
40 Then Laocoön, a huge mob in his wake,

runs down in a hurry from the city heights.
Still far, he shouts: ‘Poor Trojans, are you mad?
You think the enemy has sailed away? Are Greek
gifts free of guile? Is that Ulysses’ nature?
Either enemies are hidden in the wood,
or else this thing was built to breach our walls,
to watch our homes and city from above.
Some trick lurks here. Citizens, don’t trust the horse—
I fear Greeks, even bringing offerings.’
50 With all his force, he flung a giant spear
79

at the jointed curving belly of the beast.
It stuck there quivering; the hollow space
inside the womb responded with a groan.
And if the gods and fate had not been hostile,
we’d have breached the Argive lair with swords.
Troy and Priam’s citadel would still be standing.

Now a group of Dardan shepherds in an uproar
dragged a man to Priam, hands bound behind his back.
They didn’t know he’d let them stumble onto him,
60 that he planned to throw Troy open to the Greeks.
He was poised and ready for two outcomes:
to ply his tricks or meet a certain death.
Trojans rushed from everywhere, crowding round
the captive, keen to see and jeer the loudest.
Now hear how the Greeks baited their trap, and from
one act of treachery, understand them all!
Jostled and unarmed, facing all our stares,
he stood and gazed round at the Phrygian ranks
and groaned: ‘What land, what sea, can save me now?
70 What fate’s in store after my suffering?
I have no place among the Greeks, and worse,
the hostile Trojans want my blood.’ With this lament
he changed our minds and checked our impetus.
We prompted him to tell us who he was, what news
he had, why he might hope for pity though a captive.
Finally, he set aside his fear and spoke.
‘King, I’ll tell you everything, all the truth,
come what may. I won’t deny I’m Greek.
80

I’ll say this first: if wicked Fortune’s ruined
80 Sinon, she won’t make him an empty liar too.*
Has some news of glorious Palamedes,
Belus’ son, yet reached your ears? He spoke out
against the Trojan War, so the Argives killed him
on false charges, though he was innocent.
Now they mourn the man they robbed of light.
He was our relative, and when I was a boy,
my pauper father sent me as his page.
While power lent him safety and he prospered
in the royal council, I too had some fame
90 and honor. But when he left the shores of life
thanks to sly Ulysses’ malice (you know it well)
I wore out my life in grief and shadows,
livid at the murder of my blameless friend.
Madman that I was, I didn’t hold my tongue:
I swore vengeance, if we won the war
and I got home to Greece. My words roused hate—
my first slip on ruin’s path. From then on,
Ulysses terrified me with his accusations
and spread rumors to the army to get allies
100 for his plot. He didn’t rest till Calchas helped—
but why tell a tale that no one wants to hear?
Why play for time? If all Greeks are the same, and you
know I’m Greek, kill me now. The Ithacan
would love it, the Atridae would pay handsomely.’
Now we burned still more to hear what happened,
blind to this great evil, to Greek skill in lies.
He went on, shaking with contrived emotion:

81

‘The weary Argives often wanted to break camp,
to leave the endless fighting and abandon Troy.
110 How I wish they had! But harsh weather kept them
from the sea, and the south wind scared them
every time they launched. Once this horse of maple
planks* was built, storms thundered across the sky.
Worried, we dispatched Eurypylus to quiz
Apollo’s oracle. He brought us back grim news.
“Greeks: when you first came to Trojan shores,
you pacified the breezes with a virgin’s blood.*
Only blood will get you back to Greece: offer
a Greek life.” When the army heard this news,
120 we were stunned. Our blood ran chill with fear.
Who had the fates selected? Who did Apollo want?
Then the Ithacan dragged out the prophet Calchas
and told him to reveal the gods’ intent. Many
warned me even then about the cruel crime
Ulysses planned. But though they saw it coming,
they kept quiet. Ten days the seer sat silent
in his tent; he would not pick a man to die.
At last, driven by Ulysses’ threats, he spoke
and marked me for the altar—as they’d planned!
130 All agreed: the death each feared for himself
was bearable when shunted onto one poor wretch.
The awful day arrived. The rites were readied,
grain was salted, bands were tied around my temples.
I broke free, I confess it! I cheated chains and death
and spent the night concealed in swampy rushes,
lurking till they’d left—if by chance they would.
Now I’ve no hope to see my former homeland,
my darling children, or my longed-for father,
82

whom the Greeks may punish for my flight,
140 avenging my offense by killing those I love.
I beg you by the gods above, by the powers
that know truth, by whatever trust still stands
unsullied among humans, pity my ordeal
and a soul that suffers so unfairly.’
These tears won him life, and even pity.
Priam himself had the chains that bound
his hands and feet removed, and spoke kind words:
‘Whoever you may be, forget the Greeks you’ve lost:
you’ll be one of us. Just tell me the truth:
150 Why did they build this giant horse? Who made it,
and what for, an offering or a siege?’
Sinon, schooled in falsehood and Greek guile,
raised his hands, now free of chains, up to the sky,
and cried: ‘I call to witness the eternal flames
and sacred powers, the altar and the cruel
sword I fled, the holy bands I wore as victim!
It’s right to break my sworn oath to the Greeks,
it’s right to hate those men and bring to light
all that they hide. No homeland, no laws hold me.
160 Troy, if I speak truth, if I repay you richly,
then keep your pledge, save me as I save you.
From the start, the Argives’ every hope, their trust
in victory, depended on Athena. But when
godless Diomedes and that architect
of crime, Ulysses, crept into her shrine to steal
Pallas’ fateful likeness,* killed the guards,
seized the sacred statue, and dared defile
the goddess’ headbands with their bloody hands,
83

Greek hopes waned, receded, ebbed away.
170 Their strength is crushed, the goddess is estranged.
Pallas gave signs of this with clear omens.
Hardly was the statue set in camp when flames
shot blazing from its staring eyes, its wood
poured sweat, and incredibly, Pallas herself
sprang up three times, brandishing her sword
and quivering spear. At once Calchas told us
that we had to leave and brave the seas; our swords
would not raze Troy without new signs from Greece.
We had to pacify the gods we’d traveled with
180 in our curved keels. So they’re sailing to Mycenae
to rearm and get good omens; they’ll be back
just when you don’t expect them. This was Calchas’ reading.
They built the horse on his advice, to atone
for the Palladium and the offended goddess.
He ordered them to raise a towering mass
of woven planks that reached up to the sky,
so big it couldn’t pass your gates into the city
and save you now that the Palladium is gone.
If your hands pollute Athena’s offering,
190 then utter ruin will bring down Priam’s empire
(may the gods turn back the omen on the seer!),
but if you help the horse climb to the citadel,
Asia will bring great war to Pelops’ walls,
and ruin will fall on our children instead.’
Through this trap, this skillful lying, Sinon’s story
won us over. We were captured by forced tears
and falsehoods—we, whom Diomedes and Achilles,
ten years, a thousand ships, had failed to conquer.
84

Now another crisis, still more terrifying,
200 struck our suffering people, panicked our blind hearts.
Laocoön, chosen by lot as Neptune’s priest,
was slaughtering a huge bull at the altar.
Suddenly, twin snakes from Tenedos—
I shudder at the telling—headed for the shore,
their giant coils cutting through calm waters,
their chests and blood-red crests raised high over
the surface. Behind, their tails skimmed the sea,
giant slinky corkscrews leaving a huge wake.
The sea foamed and splashed: then they were ashore.
210 Their eyes were flaming, shot with blood and fire.
As they hissed, they licked their jaws with flicking tongues.
Our blood drained and we scattered from the sight.
They made a beeline for Laocoön. First
they twisted round his two sons’ tiny bodies,
feeding on their helpless flesh with fangs.
Then they snared the father as he ran to help
bringing his spear. They bound him with huge loops,
twice circling his waist and throat with scaly
trunks, their heads and necks rearing above.
220 As he tried to break their knots with both his hands,
his headbands slimed with venom and black gore,
his awful shrieks rose to the sky—like the bellows
of a wounded bull when he’s escaped the altar
and dislodged the ax half-buried in his neck.
Then the two snakes glided to the shrine of Triton’s
daughter and her Trojan citadel, and hid
under her statue’s feet and rounded shield.
And now a new fear crept into our shaken hearts.
85

We said Laocoön deserved to pay this price,
230 since his spear-tip wounded sacred wood,
since he flung his profane weapon at the horse.
We resolved to take it to Athena’s temple
and appease the goddess with our prayers.
We breached our walls—our own!—and laid the city open.
Then we set to work. We laid down gliding wheels
under the hooves and hemp ropes round the neck.
The deadly mechanism climbed our city, weapons
in its womb. Boys and unwed girls thronged round it
singing hymns, glad to touch the cable. The thing
240 slid ominously to the citadel. O Troy!
My land, home of gods! Dardan walls
famous in war! Four times the horse balked at the gates,
four times its womb clattered with swords.
But we pressed on, careless, blind with passion: we set
the fatal monster on our sacred citadel.
Then Cassandra told our future, but no Trojan
would believe her—this was Apollo’s will.
And we, poor things, on our final day of life,
decked the holy shrines with wreaths throughout the town.
250 The heavens wheeled and night arrived from Ocean,

veiling earth and sky—and the Greek treachery—
with far-flung shadow. Scattered through the city,
the Trojans were silent. Sleep held their weary bodies.
Meanwhile the Greek fleet left Tenedos under
the moon’s complicit quiet, heading for familiar
shores. The king’s ship lit a beacon, and Sinon,
saved by gods and cruel fate, secretly freed
the soldiers from their prison in the pinewood womb.
86

The unlatched horse returned them to fresh air. Cruel
260 Ulysses, Sthenelus, Thessandrus gladly
left the hollow belly on a lowered rope:
next, Acamas and Thoas; then Achilles’ son
Neoptolemus; Machaon and
Menelaus; then the horse’s builder
Epeus. Marauding through a city sunk
in wine and sleep, they killed the guards. Opening
the gates, they met their friends and joined up as planned.
It was the time when sleep first comes to weary mortals,
creeping over us, the sweetest gift of gods.
270 But in my dreams, grieving Hector came to me,
weeping floods of tears, looking as he did
when dragged behind Achilles’ chariot:
black with bloody dust, his swollen ankles pierced
by thongs. How pitiable, how altered from the man
who took Achilles’ armor as his spoils,
who lobbed Trojan flares onto Greek prows!
His beard and hair were matted with dry blood
and he had the many wounds received in fighting
for his city’s walls. Weeping myself,
280 I spoke to him in grief: ‘Light of our land,
Troy’s most trusted hope, why have you come
so late? What shores sent you, longed-for Hector?
We’re exhausted from the slaughter of our people,
the great sufferings of our men, our city.
But who so vilely mangled your kind face?*
What’s the meaning of these wounds?’ No reply
to this, no time for useless questions. He heaved
a groan from deep inside and said: ‘Get out,
87

goddess-born, save yourself from flames.
290 Greeks control the city: Troy falls from her heights.
Enough’s been done for Priam and our country:
if Pergamum could be defended, I’d have done it.
Troy entrusts her holy rites and gods to you.
Take these partners of your fate, and once you’ve crossed
the sea, build them great walls.’ From the shrine,
he fetched the holy headbands and the ever-living
flame of Vesta, goddess of the hearth.
From the city there rose mingled screams of anguish.
More and more—although my father’s home
300 was set apart and blocked by trees—the noise
grew louder, war’s full horror closed on us.
Shaken from my sleep, I scaled the highest point
of the roof, and stood straining to hear.
The sound was like a fire fanned by raging wind
that devastates the wheat; like rivers pouring down
a mountain-slope to flatten farmlands and ripe crops
(the oxen’s work) and drag trees headlong. A shepherd hears
the noise from his rocky crag, and listens, baffled.
Then truly how the Greeks keep faith was clear to see.
310 Deiphobus’ great palace fell, devoured by fire.
Ucalegon’s next door was bright with flame.
Sigeum’s broad straits mirrored the inferno.
The shouts of men, the blare of horns, rose to the sky.
Crazed, I grabbed my sword. I had no plan, and yet
I burned to band a group for war, to storm
the citadel with friends. Rage and fury drove me.
I felt it was a lovely thing to die in battle.

88

But now Panthus, Othrys’ son, the priest of Phoebus,
slipped past the Greek spears to sprint in panic
320 to my door, holding our defeated gods,
dragging his small grandson by the hand. I asked:
‘Panthus, where’s the heart of battle? Where’s our stand?’
At my words he groaned and said: ‘The final day
has come for Troy, the hour of no escape. We were
Trojans, this was Ilium, our fame was great.
Cruel Jupiter has given everything
to Argos. Greeks rule in our burning city.
The horse stands on the citadel disgorging soldiers,
the victor Sinon revels as he feeds the flames.
330 Greeks in thousands gather at the open gates,
the most who’ve ever come from great Mycenae.
Still others man the check-points, swords unsheathed:
a glinting line of blades prepared to kill.
Our guards at the entrance have no room
to fight, but still resist and battle blindly.’ Panthus’
words and the gods’ will propelled me into armor
and to the city’s flames, where grim Fury
and the clamor called me, where shouts rose to the sky.
Riphaeus and Epytus, a mighty fighter,
340 joined us, appearing in the moonlight. Dymas
and Hypanis blended with our band, and young
Coroebus, Mygdon’s son, who’d just arrived
in Troy, on fire with passion for Cassandra.
He was fighting for his in-law Priam
and the Phrygians—unhappy man, who didn’t follow
his bride’s warnings when the god inspired her.
When I saw them gathered, on fire for the fight,
89

I spoke to rouse them further: ‘My friends, so brave
for a lost cause: if you’re set on joining me
350 in certain death, you see the way things stand.
All the gods whose strength supported Troy
have left their shrines and altars. The city you defend
already burns. Let’s die by plunging into war.
Our only refuge is to have no hope of refuge.’
This fired their frenzy. We became like wolves,
prowling in night fog, mere bellies driven by
harsh hunger, our pups with parched throats waiting
in their dens. We went past hostile spears to meet
our end, making our way to the city’s heart.
360 Black night swept round us, dark and void.
Who could describe the death and devastation
of that night, what tears could match our anguish?
Our ancient city fell, so long a seat of power.
There were bodies everywhere. They lay unmoving
in the streets and houses, in the temples
of the gods. But we are not the only ones
to pay with blood. Bravery returned to beaten
hearts as well; Greek victors fell. All around
were bitter grief and fear, and different scenes of death.
370 The first Greek to meet us with a band of men,

Androgeos, wrongly took us to be allies
and addressed us affably: ‘Hurry, men!
What’s the reason for this slowness? Others
search for booty and grab spoils from burning Troy.
Are you just now coming from the ships?’
Our answers strained his trust: he saw at once
he’d stumbled on the enemy. He stepped back
90

stunned and falling silent—as if he’d just
trampled on a hidden snake in prickly brambles,*
380 then recoiled in fear as the adder reared
in rage, puffing out its sky-blue hood.
Like this, he fell back, horrified to see us.
We charged the group and fenced them in with swords.
On unfamiliar ground, they panicked—and we
slaughtered them. Fortune favored our first clash.
Buoyed by this success, Coroebus yelled
exultantly: ‘My friends, this is Fortune’s path.
Let’s take the way to safety that she’s shown,
swapping shields and helmets with the Greeks.
390 Is it deceit or bravery? Who cares in war?
They’ll give us their armor.’ He took Androgeos’s
blazoned shield and crested helmet as his own.
Then he strapped a Greek sword to his side.
Dymas, Rhipeus, and all the men did too,
delighted. They armed themselves with these new spoils.
We moved on, mixed in with the Greeks,* under their gods.
We fought many scuffles in the murky dark,
we dispatched many Danaäns to Hades.
Others scattered to the ships and the safety
400 of the shore. Some scaled the massive horse
in shameful fear to hide inside the well-known womb.
How wrong it is to trust the gods against their will!
Cassandra, Priam’s daughter, was being dragged
by her long hair from Pallas’ inner shrine.
In vain she turned her burning eyes to heaven
—her eyes, since her gentle hands were bound with rope.
Coroebus could not bear the sight. Mad with rage
91

he plunged into the fray, ready to die.
We followed, all of us, closing ranks and rushing.
410 But we were overwhelmed by friendly spears
thrown by Trojans from the temple roof.
Our Greek crests and armor caused this wretched carnage.
Then the Greeks, groaning angrily at our
attempted rescue, rallied from all sides and charged:
Dolopians, fierce Ajax, the Atridae—
like a breaking storm, when all the winds collide,
west with south and east, driven by Dawn’s horses,
and the forests shriek; Nereus whips the sea-foam
with his trident, churning up the depths.
420 Those we’d routed by our trick and driven
through the city in the dark of night, return.
They’re the first to recognize our shields
and lying armor, to note our different dialect.
It’s over. Their numbers crush us. Coroebus
is first to fall. He’s killed by Peneleus
at the warrior goddess’ altar. Rhipeus
dies too, Troy’s most just and righteous man
(the gods didn’t care). Dymas and Hypanis
perish, speared by their friends. Your piety
430 does nothing, Panthus, nor Apollo’s ribbons.
O Troy’s ashes, death pyre of my people,
I swear by you that as you fell I didn’t run
from risk or Argive spears. If my fate were death,
I’d have earned it like a warrior. Our group
splits up. I have Pelias and Iphitus
(one slowed by age, the other by Ulysses’ wound).
Shouts near Priam’s palace summon us at once.
And here the scale of war eclipses every battle
92

and the city full of death; here the God
440 of War has truly gone berserk. We see the Greeks
storming the palace doors, their shields providing shelter.
Next ladders hug the walls and men inch up the rungs,
holding shields in their left hands against missiles
and grasping ramparts with their right. When the Trojans
see the end, on the very brink of death
they break off pieces of the roof and battlements
to use in their defense, throwing down the gilded
beams so prized by our ancestors. Others
draw their blades to guard the palace doors below,
450 crowding round them in dense ranks. Our courage
wakes again, and we run to help the royal
home, relieve the men, and reinforce the beaten.
There was a hidden rear entrance to the palace
to a passage running between Priam’s halls.
While the kingdom lasted, poor Andromache
often took this path to see her royal in-laws,
unattended, taking small Astyanax
to his grandfather. Through this I reach the roof,
where doomed Trojans hurl their spears in vain.
460 At the roof’s sheer edge a tower rises skyward.
From this, you could see all Troy, the Greek ships
and their camp. We strike this tower with our swords
where its joints are most stressed by the many floors
and pry it from its perch. Shoved over the edge,
it plunges with a crash, bringing ruin with it,
crushing the Greek soldiers far and wide.
But others take their place; the barrage
of rocks and varied missiles never ceases.
93

Here’s Pyrrhus, flashing in bronze armor,
470 exulting with his weapons at the entryway, like
a snake fed by toxic plants, whose bloated length
chill winter shields under the soil. Come spring,
he sheds his skin, emerging new and shiny,
coiling his sleek length upward to the sun;
his three-forked tongue darts in and out.
Great Periphas and Achilles’ armor-bearer
and charioteer, Automedon, storm the palace
with the Scyrians and throw up torches
on the roof. In front, Pyrrhus makes short work
480 of heavy doors. He snatches up a double ax
and tears the bronze jambs from their hinges, hacks
the panels, smashes solid oak. A window opens
to the palace; long halls and courts appear.
He sees Priam’s sanctuary, used by kings
of old, and armed men guarding at the entrance.
Inside, moans mix with sobbing and confusion,
the vaulted halls resound with women’s weeping.
The clamor rises to the golden stars.
Terror-stricken mothers roam the spacious rooms
490 or cling to doorposts, kissing them. Pyrrhus
presses forward with his father’s strength. No lock,
no sentries slow him down. The doors collapse
before his battering ram and fall off damaged hinges.
Brute force has made a path, and the Greeks break in,
butcher the front guard and fill the place with troops.
They swoop in faster than a churning stream
that’s burst its banks and smashes through the dikes:
a wall of water floods the fields, dragging
herds and stalls across the land. I saw blood-crazed
94

500 Pyrrhus charge in with the two Atridae.

By the altar I saw Hecuba, her sons’
one hundred wives, and Priam, polluting with his blood
the altar-fires he’d blessed. The fifty marriage beds
that promised many children, the doors that flaunted
foreign gold and spoils—all of it destroyed.
The Greeks owned everything the fire spared.
Perhaps you wonder about Priam’s fate.
When he saw Troy fallen, his palace blasted open,
the enemy squarely inside, the old man strapped
510 his long-neglected armor to his shaking frame,
a futile act, and took his useless sword.
He ran to die among the mass of Greeks.
In the palace center, beneath the open sky,
there was a giant altar. An ancient laurel tree
leaned over it and cast shade on the house-gods.
Hecuba was huddled here with her daughters,
like doves driven earthward by dark storms. They sat
clinging to the gods’ statues in worthless hope.
When she noticed Priam taking up the armor
520 of his youth, she cried, ‘What deadly thoughts, poor husband,
make you arm yourself? Where are you rushing?
This is no time for such help, even if
my Hector were here himself. Come: this altar
will save us all, or we’ll die together.’ She drew
the old man close and sat him in that sacred place.
Now Priam’s son Polites rushes in,
fleeing Pyrrhus’ butchery, past Greek spears,
through long halls and empty courtyards, wounded,
95

with Pyrrhus in fierce pursuit, so close
530 to catching him and pushing in the spear.
In his parents’ sight at last, their son
goes down. His life and blood gush out together.
At this, Priam, himself at death’s door,
cannot hold back. He shouts in fury: ‘Pyrrhus!
For this murder, for all your outrages
I hope the gods pay you as you deserve,
if there’s any piety in heaven
that cares about such things—forcing me to see
the slaughter of my son, fouling a father’s eyes!
540 Achilles, whom you claim as father in your lies,
was no such enemy to Priam. He had respect
for the rights of supplicants, for their trust
in him! He gave me Hector’s pallid corpse
for burial, and let me go back to my throne.’
The old man threw his feeble spear. The clanging bronze
of Pyrrhus’ shield blocked it easily; it dangled,
useless, from the central boss. Pyrrhus replied:
‘Then be my messenger—go tell my father
of the evil deeds of his degenerate son.
550 Now die.’ The old man was dragged trembling to the altar,
slipping in his dead son’s blood. Pyrrhus grabbed
his hair, and with his other hand unsheathed
his flashing sword. He sank it in the king’s side
to the hilt. This was Priam’s end,
the death that fate had given him: to watch
Troy fall in flames. Once proud ruler over Asia’s
countless lands and people, he lies now on the shore,
a giant trunk without a head, a nameless corpse.*

96

Then a ghastly dread came over me.
560 When I saw the old king gasping out his life
from that brutal wound, I froze, thinking of
my dear father and Creusa all alone—
our household sacked, small Iülus maybe
dead already. I turned to see which men were left.
They’d all abandoned me:* exhausted and despairing,
they’d fallen off the roof, or stumbled into flames.
I was the only one of them alive.
As I roamed through Troy, staring at a city
lit by fire everywhere, I saw Helen*
570 inside Vesta’s shrine, lurking in a corner.
She feared the Trojans’ hatred for her role
in our defeat, but also the Greeks’ vengeance,
and the anger of her cuckold spouse. A curse
to Troy and Greece, the hateful thing clung to the altar.
Flames of rage rose in my heart—I wanted vengeance
for my country. She had to die for what she did.
‘Why should she go safely back to Sparta
and her home, Mycenae, a triumphant queen?
Why should she see her husband and her family,
580 tended by a throng of captive Trojan boys
and girls? Priam perished by the sword, Troy burned,
the Dardan shore so often oozed with blood—for this?
No! Punishing a woman brings no glory,
but this would win me praise—rubbing out
this foulness with the punishment that she
deserves. I’ll drink my fill of flames of vengeance
and appease the ashes of my people.’
But as I raved and blustered in my rage,
97

my gentle mother showed herself to me
590 never before so clear, shining purely
in the dark, showing her divinity,
as she appears to other gods. She took my hand
to stop me. These words came from her rosy lips:
‘My son, what great sorrow spurs this reckless rage?
Why so angry? Where’s your love for us?
Won’t you go see if Anchises, aged and weary,
is where you left him, and if your wife, Creusa,
and your son Ascanius are still alive?
Greek ranks mill all around them. If not for my care,
600 flames would have them, swords would spill their blood.
Don’t blame Paris, or Helen’s hateful beauty.
It’s the cruelty of the gods that’s overturned
our wealth and hurls Troy from her heights. Look:
I’ll tear away the swirling mist that dulls
your human vision with its damp embrace.
For your part, don’t fear to carry out
your mother’s orders: obey her advice.
Here, where you see a heap of ruins, boulders
torn apart, and dusty smoke that billows high,
610 Neptune’s prying up the walls and bedrock with his
giant trident, shaking and uprooting the whole
city. Here, savage Juno’s first to seize
the Scaean Gates. She furiously calls the allied
army from the ships, her sword strapped at her side.
There, Tritonian Pallas holds the heights.
Her aura and her savage Gorgon-shield gleam bright.
Jupiter himself infuses them with strength
and spirit, himself goads on the gods against Troy’s army.
Escape, my son, and give up on your efforts.
98

620 I’ll stay and set you safely at your father’s door.’

She spoke, then vanished in the night’s thick shadow.
Awful shapes appeared, and the power
of the gods that hated Troy. Now I clearly
saw all Ilium collapsing in the flames,
and Troy, once Neptune’s city, toppled from her roots—
like an ancient ash that mountain woodsmen
hurry to uproot. They strike the wounded trunk
with axes many times. As each blow shakes
the leafy crown, the tree seems just about to fall.
630 Bit by bit, it’s overwhelmed. It groans
and topples, leaving ruin in its wake.
The gods guide my descent, and I slip through
hostile fire. Spears and flames retreat before me.
When I reached the entrance to my parents’
ancient home, my father—whom I was so keen
to carry to the mountain heights, the one
I looked for first of all—refused to live
or suffer exile now that Troy was lost.
‘You should go,’ he said, ‘your lifeblood is still
640 fresh and you have your strength. Escape!
If the gods had wanted me to live, they’d have
saved my home. It’s enough—too much—to have
survived the sacking of the city once already.*
Say goodbye, and leave my body lying here.
On my own, I’ll find a Greek to kill me; he’ll take
my spoils out of pity. Burial’s no matter.
I’ve delayed the end too long, hated by
the gods, useless since the king of gods and men
struck me with his thunderbolt’s hot breath.’*
99

650 So he said, unmoved, and would not stir.

All of us broke down in tears: my wife, our son,
the slaves. We begged him not to drag us down
with him or help the Fate pursuing us.
He refused, sticking to his plan and place.
Again I rushed to arm myself, choosing death—
unhappily, but were there other options now?
‘Did you think I’d run off, father, leaving you?
Did a parent’s lips utter this sacrilege?
If the gods want Troy annihilated,
660 if you’ve resolved to add yourself and yours
to her collapse, the door is open. Soon Pyrrhus will
come from Priam’s pools of blood, Pyrrhus, who
butchers sons in front of fathers, fathers at
the altar. Kind mother, you saved me from the swords
and flames for this? So I could see the enemy
invade our house, see my father, son,
and wife slaughtered in each other’s blood?
Fetch my armor, men! The last light calls the conquered.
Lead me to the Greeks! I’ll fight this war again.
670 Not all of us will die today without revenge!’
Again I fastened on my sword, lifted my shield
by its strap, and went to leave. But at the door,
my wife crumpled to my feet and held up little
Iülus. ‘If you’re going to your death,’ she said,
‘take us to die with you. But if the past has shown
that you can trust your weapons, guard this house first.
You’re deserting your small son, your father
and your future widow—just think to whom!’

100

She was filling all the house with her lament,
680 when suddenly, amazingly, there came an omen.
As we held our son in both our arms and grieved,
a soft light seemed to pour out from the top
of Iülus’ head, and a harmless fire
licked his tender curls and flickered round his face.
Shaking and afraid, we rushed to knock the flames
out of his hair and douse the sacred fire with water.
But my father looked up at the stars with joy,
stretching out his hands to heaven. He prayed:
‘Almighty Jupiter, if any prayers move you,
690 look at us, that’s all: and if our piety
is worthy, help us and confirm your omen.’
At the old man’s words, a sudden thunder
rumbled on our left, and a shooting star
fell from the sky and flew across the dark,
trailing flame and blinding light. We watched it
glide over the rooftops and then bury
its bright path in Ida’s forests. Just a glowing
wake remained. Sulfur smoked from all the land.
Now my father was defeated. He rose, prayed to
700 the gods, and hailed the sacred star. ‘No more delay!
Gods of Troy, I follow you. I’ll go where
you lead us. Save my household and my grandson.
This sign is yours, Troy is in your power.
I give in, my son. I won’t refuse to leave.’
Already the inferno grew louder through the city.
We could feel the rolling waves of heat.
‘Come, then, dear father, hold my neck,’ I said.
‘I’ll take you on my back, you won’t weigh me
101

down. Come what may, we’ll share one danger,
710 or one escape. Let small Iülus stay with me.
My wife will trail our passage at a distance.
House-slaves, pay attention. As you leave the city,
there’s an ancient shrine of Ceres on a hill;
it’s abandoned. Near it grows an ancient cypress
tended by our fathers’ reverence for many
years. Take different paths—we’ll meet right there.
Father, take the holy vessels and our gods.
I’ve come from lengthy battle and fresh slaughter.
I can’t touch them till I clean myself in flowing
720 water.’ I issued these commands, threw a tawny
lion pelt over my brawny shoulders, then bent
to lift my burden.* Small Iülus held
my hand, keeping up with childish steps.
My wife followed us; we stayed in the shadows.
And though I was so recently indifferent
to spears and crowds of hostile Greeks, I was anxious
now, set on edge by every breeze and sound—
fearful for my burden and companion.
Just as we approached the city gates
730 and I thought we’d made it safely to the end,
suddenly the sound of swiftly marching feet
seemed to come our way, and my father, peering
through the dark, shouted ‘Run, my boy, they’re close!
I can see their flashing shields and gleaming bronze!’
Here some spiteful power robbed me of my wits.
I panicked, and as I bolted off the path,
running from the route I knew, my wife,
Creusa, was sadly ripped from me by fate.
Did she stop? Get lost? Sink down in exhaustion?
102

740 I don’t know. I never saw my wife again.

I hadn’t turned to find her gone or thought
of her until I reached the knoll with Ceres’ shrine.*
Here, when we gathered finally, one soul
was missing, gone from husband, friends, and son.
I lost my mind, accusing every man and god.
Was there a crueler blow to me in fallen Troy?
I left my son, Anchises, and the Trojan gods
with the others, concealed in a valley’s bend.
Then I strapped my sword on, turned back to
750 the city. I was set on risking everything,
retracing all of Troy, exposed to death again.
First I went back to the walls and the dark gate
through which I’d left. I looked for my former
footsteps, and traced them backward through the night.
Horror filled me everywhere; the very silence
scared me. Next I went home just in case
she’d backtracked to the house. The Greeks had taken it.
Wind fanned the hungry fire to the roof, flames rose
over everything, and heat-waves warped the air.
760 I left. Then I returned to Priam’s palace and
our citadel. There, in the vestibule
of Juno’s empty shrine, cruel Ulysses guarded
spoils with Phoenix. All around was Trojan treasure
torn from plundered temples: altars of the gods,
golden bowls, giant heaps of looted garments.
Rounded up, trembling mothers with their children
stood all around in lengthy lines. I even
dared to shout into the night, filling
the streets with my unhappy cries, calling
103

770 ‘Creusa’ many times. It was in vain.

But as I ran through all the city’s homes,
searching endlessly, sad Creusa’s ghost
appeared to me, larger than I knew her.
I was aghast. My hair stood up, my voice
stuck in my throat. She reassured me, saying:
‘Dear husband, don’t give in to this mad grief.
None of this takes place without the gods’ consent.
It’s not right for you to take Creusa with you
as your wife. Olympus’ ruler won’t allow it.
780 Your fate’s a long exile. You’ll plow the endless ocean
and make it to Hesperia, where the Lydian
Tiber* gently flows through fertile fields. There,
good fortune and a kingdom with a royal bride
are yours. Don’t cry for your beloved Creusa.
I won’t see the haughty homes of Myrmidons
or Dolopians, slave to a Greek woman.
I’m a Trojan, Venus’ daughter-in-law.
The great mother of the gods keeps me here,
on these shores….And now goodbye…Love our son.’
790 She dissolved into thin air, leaving me
in tears, wanting to say so much. Three times
I tried to throw my arms around her neck,
three times the ghost I tried to hold flowed through
my hands—like a light breeze or a fleeting dream.
At last, the night was over, and I joined my group.
Here, I was surprised to find a giant crowd
of new companions who’d poured in: women, men,
and soldiers, a grieving throng escaping Troy.
They came from all around with what they had,
104

800 prepared to cross the sea to any land I chose.

By now, the morning star was rising over
Ida’s heights, bringing in the day. The Greeks
maintained their blockade at the gates. No hope of help.
I gave up, lifted Father, and struck out for the hills.”

105

BOOK 3

AENEAS’ STORY: MEDITERRANEAN
WANDERINGS

“After the gods saw fit to shatter Asia’s power
and Priam’s guiltless people—proud Ilium in ruins,
Neptune’s Troy still smoking from the ground—
omens drove us to seek exile far away
in empty lands. By Phrygian Ida’s foothills, near
Antandros, we toiled to build a fleet, unsure where
the Fates would take us, where we’d settle. Others joined us.
Summer had just started when we spread our sails
to Fortune at my father’s order. Tearfully
10 I left the shores and harbors of my land, the fields
of former Troy, sailing for deep seas: an exile,
with my people, son, and gods of sky and hearth.
Far off lies a land Mars loves, with wide plains
tilled by Thracians. Fierce Lycurgus ruled there
long ago; his gods and he were once Troy’s allies
when our luck still stood. I sailed there, setting
our first town along the curving shore. It was
called Aeneadae, for me. But the fates
were hostile. I was making offerings to my mother
20 and the gods who help new ventures. On the shore
106

I sacrificed a glossy bull for Jupiter.
There was a mound nearby with cornel shrubs
on top, and bristly myrtles with sharp spikes.
I went to tear green branches from the soil
so I could spread fresh sprigs upon the altar.
But then I saw an awful omen, beggaring
belief. When I pulled the first plant from the ground,
breaking off its roots, beads of black blood
stained the soil with gore. An icy fear
30 set me shaking—my terror froze my blood.
I tried again. I pulled a grudging shoot
from a new plant, trying to solve the mystery.
This shrub oozed dark blood too. My thoughts confused,
I prayed to the woodland nymphs and father Mars,
guardian of the Thracian fields, to make
the vision harmless and remove the omen.
But when I grabbed a third clump, pulling
harder, bracing my knees on the sand, I heard
(can I speak of this?) tearful groans come from
40 beneath the mound. A cry rose up: ‘Aeneas,
must I bear your mangling too? Spare my corpse
and don’t pollute your pious hands. I’m no stranger,
but a Trojan, and this blood is not from wood.
Oh, escape this cruel and grasping shore!
I’m Polydorus. Here a crop of iron spears
covered my torn flesh and grew into sharp branches.’
I stopped then, overcome by fear and doubt.
My hair stood on end, I couldn’t make a sound.
Poor Priam sent this Polydorus, his own son,
50 to the king of Thrace to raise in secret, sending
107

much gold too. He’d lost trust in Trojan weapons
when he saw the siege around the city. But
the king, once Troy’s power was broken and her fortunes
in decline, joined in Agamemnon’s triumph.
He broke every sacred law, slaughtered the boy,
and seized the loot. (Unholy lust for gold! Is there
nothing men won’t do for you?)

When my terror
left me, I described the omens to our leaders,
above all my father, and asked for their opinion.
60 All felt we should leave that evil land
where guest-rights were defiled, and sail with the south wind.
We gave Polydorus a fresh funeral,
heaping up a mound of earth, and built him a high
altar, somber with dark ribbons* and black cypress.
The women circled it, their hair loose in our custom.
We fetched saucers foaming with warm milk
and bowls of sacrificial blood to lay his shade
to rest. For one last time, we called his name.
As soon as we could trust the tide, when the wind
70 had calmed and soft sighs called us to the sea,
we hauled the ships to shore, filling the beach,
and sailed from port. Towns and lands receded.
There’s a sacred island in the deep, dear to
the Nereïds’ mother and Aegean Neptune.
It roamed untethered till the pious Archer*
fastened it to Myconos and high Gyaros.
108

A stable home for humans now, it scorns the winds.
We sailed here; its peaceful harbor safely welcomed
my spent crew, and we revered Apollo’s town.
80 King Anius met us—king of men and Phoebus’
priest, crowned with holy laurel leaves
and sacred ribbons. He knew his longtime friend Anchises.
We clasped hands in friendship and entered his home.
I was praying in a shrine of ancient stone:
‘Apollo, give my weary people walls, a home,
a lineage and lasting city. Save this second
Troy, the remnants left by cruel Achilles and
the Greeks. Who will lead us? Where to settle?
Inspire us, Father, and provide us with a sign.’
90 At once the surroundings seemed to shake—
the doors, the divine laurels, the whole hill.
The tripod boomed, the inner sanctum opened.
As we sank to earth a voice came to our ears:
‘Sturdy sons of Dardanus! The land that first
produced your ancestors will gladly welcome you
when you return to her rich soil. Find your
ancient mother. There, Aeneas’ line, the sons
born from his sons, will come to rule all lands.’
At Apollo’s words, there was a roar of joy, but
100 confusion too. We wondered what this place was
where Phoebus told the strayers to return.
My father, thinking through the tales of old,
said ‘Listen, leaders, here’s what we can hope for.
Crete, the birthplace of great Jove, is home to
a Mount Ida, the cradle of our race.* Men live
in its hundred spacious cities and rich kingdoms.
109

From here (if the story’s right) great father Teucer
left for Trojan shores and picked a place
to rule. Our city with her citadel had not
110 yet risen, and we lived in lowland valleys.
Crete’s home to the Great Mother—and
the Corybantes’ bronze cymbals, Ida’s grove,
the silent rites, the harnessed lions that pull
her chariot. Let’s take the path the gods commend.
We’ll placate the winds and sail for Crete.
It’s not a lengthy trip: with Jupiter’s goodwill,
three days will see our fleet on Cretan shores.’
Anchises made due sacrifices at the altar:
a bull to Neptune, one to fair Apollo, a black
120 lamb to Storm, a white lamb to helpful Zephyr.
Rumor had it that Idomeneus, prince
of Crete, was exiled from his kingdom. Its coast was clear—
an island free of enemies, with empty homes!
We left Delos’ port and swept the sea, skirting
Naxos’ hilltop Bacchants, green Donusa,
Olearos, snow-white Paros, the scattered
Cyclades: islands parted by rough straits.
The sailors roared and gave it all they had. We urged
them on: ‘Let’s get to Crete! Our ancestors!’
130 A fair wind rose up at the stern behind us.
At last we beached on the Curetes’ ancient shores.
I eagerly built walls around our longed-for
‘Pergamum,’ a name that pleased my people.
I urged them, ‘Love your homes, build us a citadel.’
And then, when our boats were drawn up on dry sand,
110

when the men were busy with new brides and farms,
and I with giving laws and homes, suddenly
from some foul tract of sky a plague arrived
to rot our flesh, our trees, our crops: a time of dying.
140 Men left sweet life behind or staggered down
death’s path. The Dog Star burned the barren fields
and parched the grass; the sick plants bore no fruit.
Father wanted us to cross the sea again,
to beg Apollo’s favor at his oracle
and ask: Would the tired Trojans ever reach
their goal? Where could we find help for hardship?
It was night. Sleep held the birds and beasts of earth.
The sacred statues of the Phrygian gods
that I’d rescued from the flames of Troy
150 stood before my eyes as I lay sleeping,
revealed in the shining light the full moon cast
as it flooded through the windows. They spoke
and eased my worry: ‘Of his own accord,
Apollo sends us to your home, to tell you here
the things he’d prophesy for you at Delos.
When Troy was burned, we took you as our leader;
we crossed the swollen ocean in your fleet.
We’ll raise your children to the stars and give
an empire to your city. You must build great walls
160 for a great race and bear your long ordeal.
Your town cannot stay here. Apollo didn’t
want these coasts to be your home, not Crete!
There’s a place (the Greeks call it Hesperia),
an ancient land, strong in war and rich of soil.
The Oenetri settled it. We hear their heirs
111

now call it Italy after their leader’s name.
Here’s our proper home, where Dardanus
and Iäsius were born, the founders of our people.
Rise, and gladly tell your father news that can’t
170 confuse him. Let him look for Corythus
and Italy. Jove forbids the Cretan fields.’
I was dumbstruck by the sight and sound of gods.
It was no dream. I saw them openly—their hair
with holy bands, their faces right before me—
and I dripped with icy sweat. Leaping from
my bed, I raised my pleading hands to heaven,
praying. Then I offered unmixed wine upon
the hearth. After this ritual, I gladly told
Anchises what had happened, all in order.
180 He saw we had two parents and a double line.
He’d made a fresh mistake about our ancient home.
‘My son, so troubled by Troy’s fate,’ he said,
‘Cassandra was the only one who saw this.
I remember now she said this was the fate
foretold for us, and often spoke of our Italian
kingdom in the west. But who’d believe in Trojans
coming to Hesperia? And whom could she
convince back then? Let’s yield to Apollo and
the better path.’ We all obeyed him happily,
190 leaving this home too—only a few stayed.
We spread our sails and skimmed across the endless sea.
Once our boats reached open water, with no land
in sight, just sky and ocean all around,
a black cloud lodged over us, bringing night
and storm; the ocean bristled with dark shadows.
112

Wind whipped the water into looming waves.
We were tossed and scattered in the vast abyss.
Clouds rolled in to hide the sky. Damp night
stole our daylight, lightning split the clouds.
200 Thrown off course, we wandered the waves blindly.
Even Palinurus couldn’t tell the dark
from day, or get our bearing in mid-sea.
For three uncertain days, three starless nights
we wandered in dark fog over the water.
On the fourth, at last, we saw a land rise up.
We made out distant hills and curling smoke.
We furled the sails and strained against our oars,
churning up foam at once, sweeping across the waves.
The Strophades islands took me in—I was
210 safely on dry land. Their name is Greek; they’re in
the great Ionian sea. Vile Celaeno
and her Harpies had been living there
since Phineus’ home was closed to them*
and they fled their former feasts. Nothing fouler,
nothing worse has ever risen from the Styx
to show the anger of the gods. They’re birds
with young girls’ faces, but their belly-droppings stink,
their hands are hooked, their faces always pale
with hunger. When we sailed into this port, we saw
220 lush herds of cattle in the fields, a flock of goats
grazing the grass, and no shepherds anywhere.
We fell on them with swords, and called the gods
and Jupiter to share our spoils. Then we made some
seats along the curving coast and ate rich meat.
Suddenly, the Harpies were there from the hills:
a ghastly swoop of beating, clattering wings.
113

They tore our food and fouled it all with filth.
Besides their horrid shrieks, the stench was awful.
We tried again. At the far back of a cave
230 screened by trees and skittering shadows all around
we prepared our meal and lit the altars
once again. And again from some new place
or secret lair the screeching throng flew round our food,
sliming it with crooked claws and filthy beaks.
I told my men to grab their swords: to war
with this vile flock! They obeyed, and hid their shields
and weapons in the grass. This time, when
the Harpies swooped down screaming to the curving
shore, Misenus blared his horn to signal
240 from his lookout. My men charged in for the strange fight.
They gashed the stinking sea-birds with their swords.
But the Harpies’ plumes and backs received no wounds.
They glided off in rapid flight and left behind
their half-eaten booty and their reeking waste.
By herself, Celaeno perched upon a rock,
a prophetess of grief. This shriek burst from her chest.
‘So it’s war you want, sons of Laomedon?
As thanks for our butchered cows and bulls,
you drive the faultless Harpies from their homeland?
250 Then hear my words and fix them deep inside your heart.
The mighty Father told Apollo this, and he
told me, and I, the greatest Fury, now tell you.
You sail for Italy, summoning the winds:
you’ll reach her and her ports will open to you.
But you won’t set walls around your fated city
until wrenching hunger and your harm to us
114

will have your jaws gnawing your very tables.’*
She spoke and winged her path back to the woods.
But my men’s blood froze with sudden fear;
260 courage gone, they called on me to plead for peace,
not with swords, but vows and prayers, no matter
if the things were goddesses or grotesque birds.
On the shore, Anchises called on the great gods,
his palms stretched out, promising them sacrifice:
‘Gods, ward off these threats and this disaster.
Be kind and protect the pious.’ He ordered us
to rip the mooring from the shore and free the rigging.
South winds filled the sails: we fled through foamy waves
along the path our helmsman and the winds dictated.
270 Zacynthus’ woods appeared in mid-sea,
then Dulichium, Samê, and the sheer cliffs
of Neritos. We rushed past rocky Ithaca,
Laertes’ land, and cursed the soil that nurtured cruel
Ulysses. Soon the cloudy peaks of Mount Leucata
could be seen, and Apollo’s headland, feared
by sailors. Weary, we approached the little town,
anchored, and moored our ships along the shore.
Against all hope, we’d finally reached land.
We cleansed ourselves for Jupiter, burned altar
280 offerings, and filled the shores of Actium
for Trojan games. My naked comrades wrestled
slick with oil, as in Troy, glad to have
evaded countless cities of the enemy.
The sun circled a full year, and icy winter
scuffed the waves with northern winds. I fixed a shield
of curving bronze that great Abas once carried
115

to the temple doorpost with this dedication:
‘Aeneas gives these spoils from the Greek victors.’
Then I had the sailors take their seats and leave
290 the port. Eagerly, they swept the sea with oars.
Soon Phaeacia’s peaks vanished behind us.
We skirted Epirus and reached Chaonia’s
harbor, then climbed on foot to steep Buthrotum.
Here we heard astounding news: Helenus, son
of Priam, ruled over Greek cities. He’d won Pyrrhus’
wife and scepter—that Pyrrhus, Achilles’ son!
Andromache was once more married to a Trojan.
I was stunned, and burned with great desire
to speak to him and understand what happened.
300 I set out from port, leaving ships and shore,
and saw Andromache outside the city,
in the woods beside a second Simoïs,*
giving Hector’s ashes their sad yearly gift,
calling on his spirit by his empty grave’s
green sod. She’d raised two altars in his honor—
a place for tears.* When she saw me with my Trojan
troops, she panicked at this ghostly sight and froze.
Then warmth fled her body and she fainted.
When she finally revived, she asked:
310 ‘Is this really your face, do you really bring news,
goddess-born? Are you alive? Or, if life’s light
has left you, where is Hector?’ As she wept,
her laments filled land and sky. In this frenzy
I could barely get in a few words. Distressed,
I stammered awkwardly: ‘I do live—a life
of constant danger. Don’t doubt what you see.
But what has happened since you lost the best
116

of husbands? Have you met with better fortune,
Hector’s Andromache? Or are you Pyrrhus’
320 concubine?’ Her face cast down, she whispered:
‘Polyxena was the luckiest, forced to die
by Troy’s high ramparts at Achilles’ grave.
She wasn’t given to some man, a lottery prize.
She never warmed the victor’s bed in slavery!
When Troy was burned, they took me overseas.
I bore the scornful sneers of Achilles’ son
and gave birth as a slave. Then he married Leda’s
child, Spartan Hermione, and gave me
to Helenus, one slave to another. But
330 Orestes, enflamed with passion for his stolen bride,
driven mad by Furies for his matricide,
killed Pyrrhus when he caught him at Achilles’ altar.
At his death, part of Pyrrhus’ kingdom
went to Helenus, who named the fields
and all Chaonia for Trojan Chaon, then built
a Pergamum, this fortress on the heights.
But what winds or fates gave you your course?
Which god let you stumble on our shore?
What of the boy Ascanius? Does he live
340 and breathe the air? The son that your Trojan wife—*
Does he love the mother that he lost?
Do his father and his uncle Hector rouse
the bravery and manhood he inherited?’
She poured this out in sobs, stirring up grief
in vain, when Priam’s son, the hero Helenus,
arrived from the city walls with many men.
He knew his fellow Trojans, and he gladly led us
117

to his home, shedding floods of tears
as he spoke. I saw a little Troy, a tower
350 like the great one, and a parched stream they called Xanthus.
I embraced a ‘Scaean Gate,’ and my Trojans
shared my pleasure in this kindred city.
The king received us in his spacious hall.
In the central court we poured libations.
The food was served on gold, bowls were raised for toasts.
And now one day, then another, passed. Breezes
called the sails; they billowed with the south wind’s swell.
I approached Helenus and asked:
‘Son of Troy and spokesman of the gods, you know
360 Apollo’s will, his tripods and his laurels,
the stars, the speech of birds, the omens of
their flight. All the holy signs favor
our voyage, all the gods urge me to sail
to Italy and try for distant lands.
But the Harpy Celaeno has prophesied
strange horrors, warning us of dreadful anger
and vile famine. Tell me the first dangers to
avoid, and how to triumph over future hardship.’
Helenus offered heifers in due order
370 and asked the gods for peace. He untied the bands
around his holy head, and took me by the hand
up to your shrine, Apollo. Awe pervaded me
as the seer chanted words from the god’s mouth:
‘Goddess-born, it’s clear you sail the seas
with divine favor. The king of gods assigns
men’s fates; he turns the tides of fortune and
118

the world. I can tell you some small part of this,
so you’ll safely cross calm seas and dock
in an Italian port. Fate forbids my knowing
380 everything, and Juno stops my telling it.
First Italy. In your ignorance you plan
to sail into her ports, thinking she’s nearby.
But there’s no direct heading, no way around
long coasts. Before you build your city on safe
land, you must pull your oars in the Sicilian
sea. Then Italy’s salt waters, Avernus’ lake,
and Aeaea, Circe’s island, must be crossed.
So store these signs deep in your memory.
When a huge sow meets your worried eyes
390 by a lonely stream with oak-lined banks,
lying on the ground with thirty in her litter,
the piglets at her teats all white, herself white too:
that place will be your city, and an end to hardship.
Don’t fear you’ll eat your tables in the future.
Follow fate. Apollo will come when you call.
But the lands and coasts of Italy that neighbor
us and that our own seas wash: avoid them!
All the towns are held by evil Greeks.
The Locri of Naryca built their walls
400 close by; Idomeneus’ army holds Salento’s
plains; Meliboean Philoctetes rules
little Petelia, safe in her walls.
When your ships have reached the other coast,
once they’re moored and you’ve put altars on the shore
to pay your vows, veil your head under
your purple cloak: to see a hostile visage
as the sacred fire burns will ruin the omens.
119

Observe this custom in your rites, you and your men.
Let your sons of sons keep it with purity.
410 But when the breezes blow your boats along
Sicilian shores, and Pelorus’ straits grow wide,
take a lengthy detour, tack left by land and sea.
Avoid the coast to starboard. They say these lands
were once a single mass. Later, convulsed
by violence, they leapt apart. The lengthy course
of time can cause such massive change. The sea
flooded in and severed Italy
from Sicily. It rushed between the fields and cities
parted by new shores and narrow foaming straits.
420 Scylla guards the right side, ruthless Charybdis
the left. Three times a day it gulps a mass of water
to the lowest spiral in its depths,
then spurts it to the sky, lashing stars with spray.
Scylla’s lair is a dark cave. From here,
her mouths emerge to drag ships onto rocks.
What you see at first is human: to the waist,
a girl with lovely breasts. Below this, there’s
a sea-monster with wolves around its belly;
finally, a fish-tail. Bend around Pachynus’
430 headland, though a long and circling journey, rather
than confront vile Scylla in her stinking cave
and the crags that echo barks of sea-blue dogs.
Also: if I’m a seer of any wisdom,
if Apollo fills my mind with truth,
I’ll tell you one more thing that’s worth it all,
goddess-born, and I’ll repeat it many times:
Worship mighty Juno’s power first and foremost
120

with your prayers; offer vows and pleasing gifts
to win her favor. This way you’ll leave Sicily
440 at last, and sail in triumph to Italy.
Once you’ve reached the town of Cumae, near
Avernus’ whispering woods and sacred lakes,
you’ll see Sibyl raving deep inside her cavern.
There she sings the fates and stores her words
on leaves. She puts in order what she wrote
and locks it in the cave, where the leaves stay still
and keep their place. But when the door swings open
and a gentle breeze disturbs them, buffeting
the weightless fronds, she never thinks to catch them
450 as they fly around the cave, nor to put them
back in place, fitting verse to verse. So men
depart no wiser, and they hate the Sibyl’s home.
Don’t fear that this delay will be too costly, even
if your men complain and the voyage calls
the canvas to the deep as fair winds fill the sails.
Meet the Sibyl, plead with her to chant
her oracles herself and to set free her voice.
She’ll describe the tribes of Italy, the wars
to come, how to bear or bypass each ordeal.
460 If you honor her, she’ll bless you with fine sailing.
So much I can say in my own voice. Now go,
and raise great Troy to heaven by your acts.’

When the seer had spoken these kind words,
he sent gifts of gold and chiseled ivory
to the ships. He filled the hulls with silver,
121

copper basins from Dodona, a triplelayered breastplate of gold chain mail
and a striking cone-shaped helmet with
a horsehair crest—Neoptolemus’s armor.
470 My father got gifts too, along with horses,
guides, and rowers, and weapons for my men.
Meanwhile Anchises had us rig the sails:
not a minute of delay if fair winds blew!
Apollo’s prophet hailed him with great honor:
‘Anchises, fit to share proud Venus’ bed,
loved by gods, twice saved from Trojan ruins,
here’s Italy: seize her at full sail.
But avoid her coastline on this side;
the part Apollo offers you is further.
480 It’s your luck to have a pious son.
Now go. I waste the surging winds by speaking.’
Andromache was also sad at this last parting.
She brought out garments sewn with gold embroidery,
and a Trojan cloak for Iülus, just as lovely.
Heaping him with gifts of cloth, she said, ‘Take these
too, my boy: they’re testimony to my craft
and the lasting love of Hector’s wife,
Andromache. Accept these last gifts of your people,
you, my sole surviving image of Astyanax.
490 His eyes, his hands and mouth were just the same,
and now he’d be a young man of your age.’
I wept as I spoke my parting words:
‘Live well, you whose fate has been fulfilled
while we are called from destiny to destiny.
You’ve won your relief. There’s no sea to plow,
122

no fields of Italy to seek as they recede.*
I pray that you have better fortune in your
second Xanthus and the Troy built by your hands.
May the Greeks never encounter them!
500 If I ever reach the Tiber and its fields,
and see the ramparts granted to my race,
one day we’ll make a single Troy in spirit
from our sister cities, joining Italy
to Epirus. We share our founder, Dardanus,
and our sad past. This can be our children’s task.’
Back at sea, we skimmed Ceraunia’s cliffs,
the shortest path to Italy by ship. The sun
was setting and the hills darkened with shadow.
That night we sprawled along the shore, cradled by
510 the longed-for land, and drew lots for the next day’s oars.
Scattered on the beach, we ate and bathed;
sleep soothed our tired limbs. Night’s chariot,
driven by the Hours, was not yet near her apex
when zealous Palinurus rose to check the winds
and listen to the breezes, noting every star
that crossed the silent night: the rainy Hyades,
Arcturus, the Twin Bears, Orion armed in gold.
Seeing all was well across the clear sky,
he blared his bugle from the stern. We broke up camp,
520 took to sea and spread our sails’ wide wings.
Blushing Dawn had set the stars to flight
when far away we saw some hazy hills—
Italy’s low profile! ‘Italy,’ Achates
cried out first; ‘Italy!’ the crew shouted
123

in joy. Anchises filled a giant bowl with wine
and crowned it with a garland. He took a stand
on the high stern and called upon the gods:
‘O gods who rule the land and sea and storms,
grant us an easy passage, send fair breezes.’
530 The winds picked up, and soon we saw a harbor
with a temple of Minerva on the heights.
We trimmed the sails and turned the prows to land.
Eastern tides had carved the bay into an arc;
it projected rocky walls that foamed with salty
spray. The temple, set back from the shore, was not
in sight, but two cliffs sent out bluffs like open arms.
Here I saw four horses, our first omen.
Snowy white, they grazed across the fields.
Anchises cried: ‘New land, you bring us war.
540 Horses wear war’s gear; this herd threatens war.
Yet horses can be trained to pull a chariot
and wear a harness. There’s a hope of peace.’
Now we invoked Pallas’ sacred power,
goddess of the battle-clash, the first to greet us
in our joy. Then we veiled our heads with Trojan
robes and burned due gifts at Argive Juno’s altar,
the honor Helenus had ordered us to pay.
Our prayers duly said, at once we turned
the yardarms and their sails to the wind,
550 and left these risky lands settled by Greeks.
We saw the gulf of Tarentum (Hercules’ city,
if the story’s true). Then Juno’s shrine loomed up,
and Caulon’s fort and Scylaceum, wrecker
of ships. From far we saw Sicilian Etna.
124

We heard the ocean roaring loudly, and waves
breaking on rocks and crashing on the shore.
The shallows boiled around us, the tide swirled with sand.
My father shouted: ‘This must be Charybdis!
Helenus told us of those cliffs and jagged rocks.
560 Save yourselves, my friends, pull hard on the oars!’
They did as told, and quickly. Palinurus
was the first to twist his groaning prow to sea:
the fleet tacked leftward using oars and wind.
A curved wave thrust us to the sky, then sank.
As it fell, we plunged down to the depths of Hades.
Three times the cliffs and rocky caves boomed out,
three times the spray erupted, splattering the stars.
Now both wind and day abandoned us. Lost,
worn out, we drifted to the Cyclopes’ shore.
570 The harbor there is vast and still, sheltered

from the wind, but Etna roars with terrible
eruptions nearby. At times she spews black fog
that smokes with tar and red-hot ash, and hurls up
fiery spheres that lick the stars; at times
she belches boulders, the mountain’s mangled entrails,
or throws great hissing globs of molten lava
up to the sky. Her plunging crater seethes and bubbles.
The story’s that Enceladus’s body, scorched by
lightning, stretches crushed under this mass. Over
580 him, huge Etna exhales fire from the fissures
in her cauldron. When he shifts his weary side,
all Sicily spasms and creaks; smoke blocks out
the sky. That night, hidden in the woods,
we rode out monstrous terrors. We couldn’t see
125

what made the sounds—there were no stars,
nothing luminous, just clouds in pitch-black sky.
The witching hour engulfed the moon in fog.
Day broke and the sun’s first rays appeared.
Dawn dispelled damp shadows from the sky.
590 Suddenly a stranger staggered from the forest.
He was ragged and emaciated, barely
human. He approached us on the shore,
extending pleading arms. We stared at the reeking
man, the matted beard, the clothes fastened by thorns.
And yet he was a Greek, once sent to Troy to fight us.
When he saw our Trojan clothes and armor
from afar, he froze in terror for a moment,
then rushed madly for the beach, sobbing
and imploring us: ‘I beg you by the gods
600 and stars, by the bright air that we breathe:
take me with you, Trojans! Anywhere is fine,
I’ll be content. I know I sailed in the Greek fleet,
I confess I fought against Troy’s gods.
If this was such an awful crime, scatter my body
in the waves, drown me in the endless sea.
If I die, at least I die by human hands.’
He grabbed my knees and clung there, cringing at my feet.
We urged the man to tell us who he was,
his lineage, the story of his suffering.
610 Anchises himself didn’t wait, but gave the man
his hand, cheering him with this clear pledge.
Finally, he set aside his fear and spoke.
‘I’m Ithacan, unfortunate Ulysses’ friend:
Achaemenides, the pauper Adamastus’
126

son. I wish I’d stayed poor—but Troy called to me.
The crew forgot me here, in a Cyclops’ dismal
cave, when they fled this grisly place.
Inside it’s dark and vast, all gore and bloody
meat. The man himself’s a giant—his head bumps
620 the stars! Gods, keep this monster from our lands.
He’s too ugly to be seen, not great at talk.
He lives off his victims’ entrails and black blood.
With these eyes, I saw him grab two of our men
as he lounged inside his cave. He broke
their bodies on the rocks; the entrance swam
with sprays of blood. I saw him chew the corpses
as they oozed black gore—the still-warm bodies twitched!
But he paid. Ulysses wouldn’t stand for it.
He kept a cool head even in this crisis.
630 When the Cyclops, stuffed with food and sunk in wine,
laid down his lolling head and sprawled his bulk
across the cave to sleep, belching gobs of gore
and bloody wine, we prayed to the great gods,
then drew lots, surrounded him as one,
and pierced his giant eye with a sharpened stake,
that eye which lurked alone under his scowling brow
like a Greek shield or Apollo’s sun. We were
happy to avenge our comrades’ ghosts at last.
But you must get away from here, poor fools! Run,
640 rip your mooring from the shore! A hundred other
grim Cyclopes (just like Polyphemus,
they pen their woolly sheep inside their caves
and milk their udders; they’re just his size and shape)
live above this curving shore in the high hills.
Three times the full moon’s risen while I’ve dragged
127

my life out in the forests and the hidden lairs
of beasts. I watch them from a cliff, and shudder
at their voices and their stomping feet.
I get a meager living from the trees—berries
650 and hard nuts—or I rip out grass to eat.
I scan my surroundings: yours is the first fleet
I’ve seen approach these shores. Do what you want with me;
I’m yours if I can just escape this evil tribe.
You cut short my life instead, I don’t care how.’
Right then we saw the shepherd Polyphemus
himself on a hilltop, moving his vast bulk
among his flock and heading for the shores he knew,
a gross misshapen massive monster with no eye.
He used a pine trunk as a staff to guide his steps.
660 With him were his woolly sheep, his only joy,
the only consolation for his fate. He plunged
into the deeper water, past the waves, and washed
the blood that dribbled from his empty socket,
grinding his teeth, groaning. Then he walked out
deeper. Still the water didn’t reach his hips.
We were anxious to escape at once, and take
our worthy supplicant. Quietly, we cut
the ropes and bent to oars, churning up the water.
The Cyclops heard, and turned toward the sound
670 But he had no way to capture us, no strength
to match the pull of the Ionian sea.
He roared so loudly that the ocean’s waves all
trembled. Italy was frightened far inland
and Etna’s curving caves boomed in response.
The Cyclopes heard him. They rushed to the harbor
128

from the high hilltops and woods, and packed the shore.
We saw the brotherhood of Etna stand there
helplessly, each with one grim eye, an awful
gathering. Their heads struck clouds, like oaks whose crowns
680 reach to the sky, or cone-clad cypresses
in Jupiter’s deep forests and Diana’s grove.
Sharp fear drove us headlong. We set the ropes
for any tack that filled the sails with favoring wind.
Helenus had advised me not to steer through
Scylla and Charybdis, where the slightest slip
on either side meant death. We wanted to reverse,
but just then a north wind rose from narrow Cape
Pelorus. We passed Pantagias’ rocky delta, the bay
of Megara, low-lying Thapsus. These were the shores
690 that Achaemenides, luckless Ulysses’ friend,
showed to us as we retraced his trip.
An island once known as Ortygia spans the bay
of Syracuse, facing wave-washed Plemyrium.
They say the stream Alpheus started here and flowed
below the sea unseen. Now it mixes
with Sicilian waves at Arethusa’s delta.
We worshipped the local deities, as ordered,
then passed the fertile soil of Helorus’ marsh.
Next, we scraped by Pachynus’ high cliffs
700 and jutting rocks. Camerina’s there (Fate
wouldn’t let her move away), and the fields
and town of Gela, named after its rushing river.
Steep Acragas displayed massive walls from far,
a place that raises stallions of great spirit.
As the winds picked up, I passed Selinus’ palms;
129

we skirted Lilybaeum’s shoals and hidden reefs.
Drepanum’s port and shore of sorrow took us in.
Here, after so many storms at sea, I lost
my father Anchises—my help in every care
710 and crisis. Best of parents, rescued in vain from great
jeopardy, you abandoned your tired son.
Helenus, though he warned of many horrors, did not
predict this grief for me, nor did grim Celaeno.*
This was my last hardship, the end of my long travels.
When I left, the god sent me to your shore.”
Such was the god-sent fate Aeneas told
his spellbound audience, such his voyage.
Ending it at last like this, he fell silent.

130

BOOK 4

DIDO’S SUICIDE

But love’s pain had already pierced the queen.
She fed it with her life-blood; the hidden flame
consumed her. Aeneas’ courage and his noble
birth haunted her thoughts. His face and words
lodged in her heart. Love let her find no rest in sleep.
As Dawn lit up the land with Phoebus’ torch
and drove damp shadows from the sky, Dido
turned in anguish to her second self, her sister.
“Anna,” she said, “such nightmares torment me.
10 Who is this stranger sheltered in our home?
How proud and brave he is, and what a warrior!
I think, and with good cause, that he’s the child of gods:
fear shows up lesser men. How cruelly fate
has treated him! What wars he fought and sang of!
If I hadn’t sworn, firmly and forever,
not to give myself to anyone in marriage
when my first love died and stole our future,
if weddings didn’t sicken me, perhaps I’d yield
to this one fault.* Anna, since the death of poor
20 Sychaeus, when my brother drenched our altar
with his blood, this man alone has moved
my heart and made me waver. I recognize
131

the traces of that flame I felt before.
But I’d sooner have the depths of earth gape open,
and almighty Father hurl me down to Hades
with his bolt, to the pallid shades and inky
night, before I disobey my conscience
or its laws. The man who first married me
still has my love. Let him guard it in his grave.”
30 As she spoke, she soaked her chest with tears.
Anna answered: “Sister, dearer than life itself,
will you waste away in grief and loneliness
and never know sweet children, Venus’s rewards?
Do you suppose his ghost cares, or his ashes?
It’s true no suitors moved you in your grief,
not in Libya, nor in Tyre. You scorned Iärbas
and the other chieftains whom rich Africa
has fed on triumphs. Will you even fight a love
that pleases? Do you forget where you live? To one
40 side, invincible Gaetulians have their towns,
wild Numidians and cruel reefs hem us in;
opposite are arid lands where Barcans
rampage far and wide. Should I mention wars
brewing with Tyre, or your brother’s threats?
I think the Trojan ships followed this heading
with divine support and Juno’s favor.
What a city you’ll see rise, what a kingdom,
with this husband and his Trojan soldiers.
How Punic glory will soar with such wealth!
50 Beg for the gods’ favor, and if you get good omens,
be lavish with your guest. Find reasons to delay him
while Orion’s wintry storms rage on the sea,
while the boats are damaged and the weather harsh.”
132

Her words fed the fire of a burning heart,
gave hope to hesitation, weakened shame.
At first they went to shrines and asked for blessings
at the altars. They offered chosen sheep to Phoebus,
Father Bacchus, and to Ceres Lawgiver,
but most of all to Juno, who minds the marriage bond.
60 Lovely Dido held the cup in her right hand
and poured the wine between a snowy heifer’s horns.
She paced along the bloody altars and gods’ statues,
doubled the day’s offerings, and read with care
the throbbing guts of animals laid open.
But what can prophets know?* What use are vows
and shrines to the obsessed? The flame devoured
her soft marrow; the silent wound throbbed in her heart.
Unhappy Dido burned. Mad with love, she wandered
through the city—like a careless doe pierced by
70 a shepherd’s arrow from afar as he roams
the Cretan forest with his bow. Unknowing,
he leaves the shaft behind; she bolts through Dicte’s
groves, the fatal arrow in her flank.
Now Dido led Aeneas through the fortress
and showed him Sidon’s riches and her rising city,
faltering mid-sentence as she spoke to him;
now she hosted the same banquet when night fell,
and madly begged to hear his hardships once again;
once again she hung on every word he said.
80 When all were gone, as the moon’s dim light died out
and the setting stars urged her to sleep, she grieved
alone inside her empty home, and threw herself
onto his couch. She saw and heard him in his absence,
133

or pulled his son onto her lap, captured by
the likeness, hoping she could cheat her shameful love.
The towers stayed half-built, the soldiers did no drills,
no workers fortified the port and ramparts
for a war. Projects were put off: the walls’
menacing mass, the cranes that reached the sky.
90 As soon as Juno, Jupiter’s dear wife, saw Dido

in the fever’s grip, saw her reputation
would be no block to passion, she accosted Venus:*
“Quite the prize you’ve won, a splendid catch,
you and your boy (that great divinity!):
a single woman trapped by two gods’ tricks.
I know quite well you fear my town and hold
the houses of high Carthage in suspicion.
But what will be the end of this? What will we
achieve? Let’s aim instead at lasting peace
100 and a pact of marriage. You have what you wanted
all this while: Dido burns with love, frenzy
courses through her bones. You and I can rule
this land with equal power. Let her serve a Trojan
husband; her Tyrians will be his dowry.”
Venus realized Juno’s words were insincere—
designed to shift Italian might to Libyan shores.
So she countered: “Who’d be mad enough
to turn this down or pick a fight with you,
so long as Fortune likes this plan of yours?
110 But I don’t know Fate’s will. Would Jupiter
approve a single city filled with Tyrians
and Trojans, mingled peoples joined by a pact?
134

You’re his wife—you try your prayers on him,
and I’ll take your lead.” Royal Juno answered:
“Leave that task to me. Now I’ll tell you briefly
(listen!) how to make our plan succeed.
Aeneas and doomed Dido plan to hunt together
in the forest when tomorrow’s Titan brings
the dawn and bares the lands with light.
120 As the huntsmen run to ring the woods with nets,
I’ll send down a deluge, dark with rain and hail,
and shake the sky with thunder. The group
will scatter, swallowed by black night, but Dido
and the Trojan prince will come to the same cave.
I’ll be there, and if you’re sure you want this,
I’ll join them in a stable marriage;* she’ll be his.
This will be their wedding.” Venus, smiling at
the trick’s transparency, agreed to this request.
Dawn rises over ocean’s rim, and as day breaks,
130 a chosen band goes from the city gates to hunt.
They have broad-bladed spears for game, cordons and nets.
Massylian riders and keen-scented hounds rush out.
The Phoenician chiefs wait at the entrance
for the queen, who lingers in her bedroom.
Her splendid stallion, decked in gold and purple,
champs fiercely on the foaming bit. At last she comes
in a Sidonian cloak with an embroidered edge,
her retinue around her. Her quiver’s gold,
gold binds her hair, a gold brooch pins her purple robe.
140 Her Trojan friends approach, as does glad Iülus.
Aeneas himself, handsome past all others,
partners her and joins his band with hers.
135

He’s like Apollo as he leaves the Lycian winter
and the river Xanthus, going to his mother’s Delos
to renew the dance. At his altars, Cretans and
Dryopians and tattooed Agathyrsi roar.
The god strides over Cynthus’ slopes. On his flowing
hair, young laurel leaves are bound with gold;
arrows jangle on his shoulder. With such grace
150 Aeneas goes, godlike beauty on his face.
When they reach the hills and pathless haunts,
wild goats disturbed from rocky heights
go bounding down the slopes. Elsewhere deer
speed across the open fields in dusty,
huddled herds, and leave the heights behind.
In the valley, young Ascanius enjoys
his fiery horse, passing others at a gallop,
hoping to see a frothing boar among
the docile herds, or a tawny mountain lion.

160 Meanwhile the sky begins to change. Loud rumblings

bring on a sudden storm of rain and hail.
They scatter through the fields—the Trojan men,
the band of Tyrians, and Venus’ Dardan grandson,
cowed and seeking cover; torrents run down the hills.
Dido and the Trojan leader come to the same
cave. Ancient Earth and Juno, marriage goddess,
give the signal.* Lightning flashes, nymphs howl
from the hills, the sky is witness to the wedding.
This was the first day of death, the first cause
170 of ruin. She’s unmoved by rumor or appearance
136

and no longer plans to hide her love: she says
they’re wed. With this word she masks her fault.
At once Rumor races through Libya’s great
cities, Rumor, swiftest of all evils; she thrives
on speed and gains strength as she goes. At first
she’s small and scared, but soon she rears to the skies,
her feet still on the ground, her head hidden in clouds.
They say that Earth, riled to anger at the gods,
bore her last: Coeus’ and Enceladus’s
180 sister. She’s fast of foot and fleet of wing, a huge
horrific monster. Under all her feathers lurk
(amazingly) as many watching eyes and tongues,
as many talking mouths and pricked-up ears.
She flies by night, between the sky and earth, screeching
through the dark. Her eyes don’t close in welcome sleep.
By day she perches as a lookout on high roofs
or towers and alarms great cities. She’s as fond
of fiction and perversity as truth. And now
she gladly fills the people’s ears with varied
190 stories, giving equal time to false and true:
Aeneas, born of Trojan blood, is here.
Lovely Dido deigns to sleep with him;
they pass the winter’s length in luxury,
unmindful of their kingdoms, slaves to shameful lust.
The foul goddess spreads this gossip on men’s tongues,
then quickly turns her path to King Iärbas.
What she says enflames him and builds up his rage.
This man was born to Hammon and a Libyan nymph
he’d raped. On his sweeping land, he built a hundred
137

200 shrines to Jupiter; a hundred altars burned

eternally as watchmen for the gods. The ground
oozed sacrificial gore, the doors were bright with garlands.
They say he prayed at length before the divine
images and altars, maddened, set afire
by the bitter rumor. He raised pleading hands:
“Almighty Jupiter, we Moors worship you
with wine when we feast on ornate couches.
Do you see this outrage? When you hurl your bolts,
is our terror pointless? Does lightning from the clouds
210 land randomly, despite our fear? Are its rumblings
empty? A woman wandered to my land. She paid
to build a paltry town. I gave her shores to till
and local laws. She scorned my marriage offer
and took Aeneas in her kingdom as her lord.
And now! That Paris, with his retinue of half-men,*
a Lydian scarf tied on his oily hair, enjoys
what he stole, while we bring presents to your
so-called shrines, and revere an empty name.”
The Almighty heard him as he clutched the altars
220 praying. Jove turned his gaze to Dido’s city
and the lovers who’d forgotten their good name.
Then he ordered Mercury: “Go, my son:
call the Zephyrs, glide down on your wings
to meet the Dardan leader, who expects a future
in Tyre’s Carthage and ignores the towns chosen
by fate. Fly through the rapid breezes with my words.
This isn’t what his lovely mother promised me
he’d be, nor why she saved him twice from battle
with the Greeks. He was to rule an Italy
138

230 of war-cries, pregnant with an empire; to start a race

from Teucer’s ancient blood, and control the world.
If this great venture and its glory leaves him cold,
if he won’t labor for his own fame, does he
grudge Ascanius the citadels of Rome?
What’s his plan? Why this Libyan loitering?
What of Italy’s new race and the Lavinian
fields? He must sail! That’s my message—tell him.”
Mercury prepared to carry out his mighty
father’s order. First he bound gold sandals
240 on his feet, winged to carry him high over
land and sea, as fast as whirlwinds. He took
the wand with which he calls pale souls from Orcus
and takes others to grim Tartarus, gives sleep
or denies it, and opens dead men’s eyes.
Using this, he drove the winds and skimmed
the stormy clouds. And now, in flight, he saw
strong Atlas’ summit and his sheer slopes.
His peak supports the sky; dark clouds hug the piney
crest and lash it constantly with wind and rain.
250 Snow blankets his shoulders, rivers tumble down
his wrinkled chin. His beard bristles with ice.
Here Mercury first landed, hovering
on balanced wings. Then he dove down to the ocean,
hurling his body headlong like a gull that skims
the shores and reefs where fish abound. Just so,
between sky and earth, the god from Cyllene
flew to Libya’s sandy shore, parting the winds,
leaving behind Atlas, the father of his mother.
As his winged feet lit down by the city outskirts,
139

260 he saw Aeneas building forts and homes.

The sword he wore was starred with tawny jasper,
the cloak clasped on his shoulders gleamed with purple dye,
a gift rich Dido wove for him, working the cloth
with golden thread.* Mercury accosted him.
“So, you lay foundations for high Carthage?
Building a fine city, acting the good husband?
You forget your kingdom and your fate!
The ruler of the gods himself, whose power moves
the earth and sky, sent me down from bright
270 Olympus through the rapid breezes to say this:
What’s your plan? Why this Libyan loitering?
If this great venture and its glory leaves you cold,
if you won’t labor for your own fame, think of
Ascanius’s future, the hope of your heir Iülus:
he’s owed the rule of Italy, and the soil
of Rome.” When Mercury had said this much,
he left the sight of mortals with his final words
and vanished into thin air, gone from view.
The vision stunned Aeneas and struck him senseless.
280 His hair stood up, his voice stuck in his throat.
Aghast at such a warning and the gods’ command,
he burned to get away, to leave that land of pleasure.
But what should he do? With what words approach
the queen, who would be furious? How begin?
He thought quickly, weighing all his options,
trying different angles, turning it all over.
As he reflected, this decision seemed the best.
He called Mnestheus and Sergestus and sturdy
Serestus, and told them to prepare the fleet without
140

290 a word—to fetch the men to shore, rig the ships, and

hide the change of plans.* Meanwhile, since good Dido
would never think their deep love could be severed,
he’d try to speak to her. He’d pick the sweetest
moment and the right tone for his words. Swiftly,
gladly, they obeyed and set to work.
But Dido sensed the trick (who can deceive
a lover?) and the launch they planned. Now everything
seemed suspect, even if it wasn’t. That same impious
Rumor told the desperate queen the fleet prepared
300 to sail. On fire, she raved in frenzy through the city
like a Maenad roused by shaken rattles
and the shouts of “Bacchus!” every other year,
when revels spur her on and Cithaeron’s clamor
calls by night. At last Dido confronted him:
“Traitor! Were you hoping you could hide
this outrage, and sail away without a word?
Our love doesn’t hold you back, nor the pledge
you made me, nor the painful death I’ll die?
Why so quick to rig the fleet, when the skies
310 are wintry? Why cross the deep when north winds blow?
How cruel! If you didn’t make for foreign fields
and unknown homes, and ancient Troy still stood,
would you head for Troy across these waves?
Is it me you run from? By my tears and by your
promise (nothing else is left me in my grief),
by our wedding, by the marriage we’ve begun,
if I deserve anything from you, if you
found me at all pleasing, pity my poor home,
put off your plan, I beg, if there’s still time to beg.
141

320 Because of you, the Libyan tribes and Nomad kings

detest me, and my Tyrians are hostile. Because
you’re leaving me, my honor’s ruined, and my one path
to the stars—my reputation. My guest (this word’s
the sad remnant of ‘husband’), to whom do you
abandon me—to what sort of death? Should I
await Pygmalion, my brother, who’ll raze my city?
Iärbas, who’ll enslave me? If at least I’d made
a child with you, if a small Aeneas played
inside my home, who looked like you despite it all,
330 I wouldn’t feel so lonely and betrayed.”
She begged. But warned by Jupiter, he kept
his face unmoved and, with effort, curbed his feelings.
At last he answered briefly: “Queen, I’ll never
fault your kindness, nor any act you care to list.
I’ll never regret the memory of you,
while I draw breath, or remember my own self.
A few points in response. I didn’t try
to sneak away from here—don’t pretend I did.
I never held a husband’s torch, or made that pact.
340 If the fates would let me live the life I wanted
and resolve my worries as I’d like,
I’d first take care of Troy and my people’s
sweet remains; Priam’s high walls would stand,
I’d build a second Pergamum for the defeated.
But as it is, Apollo and the oracles
of Lycia have made great Italy my goal,
my love, my land. If the citadels of Carthage
and the vision of your Libyan city hold you,
a Phoenician, why begrudge Trojans their land
142

350 in Italy? We too may seek a foreign kingdom.

Whenever nighttime covers Earth with its damp shadows
and shining constellations rise, my father’s troubled
ghost alarms me in my dreams. He says
I’ve harmed my dear son Ascanius by robbing
him of western rule and fated fields. And now,
the gods’ own go-between, from Jupiter himself
(I swear on both our lives), has brought an order
through the rapid breezes. I saw him in full
daylight, in the city, I heard him with these ears.
360 Stop enflaming both of us with your complaints.
I make for Italy, but not of my free will.”

She’d already turned away, watching him
askance, her eyes roaming restlessly. Now she
scanned him coldly up and down, and burst out
angrily: “Traitor, no goddess was your mother!
You’re no Dardanian! The Caucasus’ sharp peaks
gave birth to you and Caspian tigers suckled you.
Why should I pretend now?* What could be worse than this?
Did he suffer as I wept, or look at me,
370 or yield to tears and feel pity for his lover?
Where should I start? Now neither mighty Juno
nor the Father, Saturn’s son, takes care of justice.
No trust is safe. I took him in, a beggar cast up
on my shore, I gave him half my kingdom—madness!
I saved his men from death, I saved his missing fleet!
How this rage rips through me! First Apollo, then it’s
Lycian prophecies, then, sent by Jove himself,
143

the gods’ own messenger brings grim news through the breezes!
As if the gods lose sleep, or worry over this!
380 I won’t stop you or refute you. Go, follow
the winds to Italy, chase your kingdom through
the waves. If the gods of justice can do anything,
I hope reefs bring you your reward! You’ll cry
‘Dido’ often as you drown. I’ll haunt you with black
flames, and when cold death divides my soul and body,
my ghost will stalk you everywhere. Wicked man,
you’ll pay. I’ll know, the news will come to me in Hell.”
Heartsick, she broke off her speech and rushed
out of his sight, gone from the light of day.
390 She left him hesitating fearfully, planning
to say more. Slave-women took her fainting body
to her marble chamber, and set her on her bed.
Pious Aeneas wanted to console her pain
and soothe her grief with words. Yet—though his great love
shook him to his soul—he groaned and followed
the gods’ orders, going to see the fleet.
Now the Trojans fell to work in earnest.
Eager to escape, they pulled the ships to shore,
set afloat the pitch-smeared keels, and brought in
400 leafy branches from the woods for making oars.
You could see them swarming all over the city:
like ants, when they pillage a huge heap of grain,
mindful of the winter, and store it in their home:
a long black stream hauls plunder through a narrow
pathway in the grass. Some roll giant grains,
pushing with their shoulders; others mind the line
and chastise stragglers. The pathway teems with work.
144

What did you feel then, Dido, as you watched?
How did you grieve, seeing from your citadel
410 the bustle on the shore before your eyes,
seeing the bay alive with so much shouting?
Cursed love, you make us stoop to anything.
Again Dido’s forced to plead with him and weep,
to submit her pride to love, and beg.
She can’t leave any stone unturned; her life’s at stake.
“Anna, you see the haste along the shore.
They come from everywhere! The canvas calls
the winds, glad sailors wreathe the sterns. Because
I knew this suffering was possible, I’ll be
420 able to endure it. Just do me one favor
in my grief, since that liar was your friend
and used to trust you with his private thoughts.
Only you could catch him in an easy mood.*
Go talk to my proud enemy and plead with him.
I took no oath at Aulis with the Greeks, to ruin
the Trojan race, I sent no fleet to Pergamum,
I didn’t exhume Anchises’ ghost and ashes.*
Why does he ignore my words? What’s his rush?
As a last gift for his grieving lover, let him
430 wait for easy sailing and fair winds.
I’m not begging for the marriage he betrayed,
or that he lose his precious empire, Latium.
I just need time, some peace and space for passion,
until Fortune teaches me to bear my loss.
I ask this final favor (have pity for your sister).
If he agrees, my death will pay him back with interest.”

145

Her unhappy sister takes these words and tears
to Aeneas many times. But no sobs
can move him, and he’s closed to any plea: the fates
440 oppose it, and the god stops up his kindly ears.
He’s like an oak, its wood stronger with age,
which Alpine winds try to uproot, blasting it
from every side. As it creaks, leaves from its shaken
trunk lie thick over the ground, but the tree sticks
to its crag, pushing its crest up to heaven
and its roots as far into deep Tartarus.
Though the hero’s buffeted on every side
by endless pleas, and his great heart grieves,
his mind remains unmoved, the tears are spilled in vain.
450 Then unhappy Dido prays for death in earnest,

distraught at her fate. It sickens her to see
the sky, and strange omens fortify her plans.
When she sets gifts on the incense-burning altars
the holy water blackens (horrible to speak of);
the wine she pours turns into filthy gore.
She tells no one these sights, not even Anna.
And besides: her home held a marble temple
to her former husband, which she honored greatly,
decking it with festive wreaths and snowy fleeces.
460 From this she seemed to hear her husband’s voice,
calling her when dark night held the earth.
On the roof, a lonely owl often cried its
gloomy hoot, dragging long notes into sobs.
Many other prophecies of seers gone by
scared her with grim warnings. In her dreams,
fierce Aeneas chased her. She always found herself
146

alone on a long road, in a frenzy,
looking for her Tyrians in desert lands,
like mad Pentheus, when he sees a throng
470 of Furies, two Suns and two Thebes, or like Orestes
in a play, when he’s chased across the stage—
his mother’s in pursuit, armed with torches
and black snakes; vengeful Furies block the exit.
So, in madness’ grip, she decides on death.
Her grief has won. She secretly mulls over
the right means and moment. Then she calls her worried
sister, hiding her intent, her face serene
with hope: “Sister, wish me joy: I’ve found a way
to bring him back or be released from love.
480 In distant Ethiopia, where mighty Atlas
whirls the starry sky upon his shoulder,
by the bounds of Ocean and the setting sun,
I’ve found a priestess from Massylia, a guardian
of the zone of the Hesperides, feeder
of the serpent there who guards the sacred branches.
She sprinkles viscous honey and the sleep of poppies
on its food. She claims her spells can ease the cares
of those she chooses, and cause deep pain in others.
She stops the flow of streams, turns back the orbit
490 of the stars, and wakes the dead at night. You’ll see
the earth quake underfoot and ash trees walk down
mountains. Dear sister, I call the gods and your sweet
self to witness: I’m forced to arm myself with magic.
Go raise a pyre in the inner court, under
the open air. Add the clothes and weapons he left
in our room, impious man,* and the marriage
147

bed that was my ruin. I must wipe out every
memory of that devil, as the priestess says.”
She falls silent, pallor sweeps her face.
500 Anna can’t imagine that these unknown rites
conceal her sister’s death—she can’t conceive
of such insanity. She fears nothing worse
than when Sychaeus died. So she follows orders.
The pyre stands in the inner court under the sky,
piled high with pine and oak. The queen adds wreaths
and crowns it with dark foliage. On their bed,
she puts his clothes, his picture, and the sword he left.
She knows what’s next. Altars stand around the pyre.
The priestess, with loose hair, shrieks the titles
510 of three hundred gods, Erebus and Chaos
and triform Hecate, Diana’s triple faces.
She scatters drops to symbolize Avernus’ water,
and herbs cut down at moonlight with bronze sickles,
bursting with the milk of inky poison,
and the warty love charm from the forehead
of a foal, torn off before its mother took it.*
Dido, holding holy grain in pious hands,
stands by the altar in one sandal, her robes loosened.
She calls upon the gods and stars that know her fate.
520 Then she prays to any divine power who’s just
and mindful, and cares for unrequited love.
Darkness falls. Through the land, weary creatures
wallow in sweet slumber; a hush is on the woods
and restless seas. The stars have circled halfway
through their path and every field is still. The beasts
148

and bright-hued birds who live among the clear lakes
or nest in thorny shrubs sleep in the silent night.*
But not heartbroken Dido, who can’t ease into rest,
530 who can’t let night into her eyes or heart.
The pain only grows worse. Her love surges again,
her great anger ebbs and flows. She broods over
her worries, turns them over in her heart.
“What now? Should I go back to my old suitors,
like a fool, and beg to be a Nomad wife,
though I rejected them so many times before?
Should I board the Trojan fleet, and fill
their every wish? As if they were grateful
for my help, or remembered my warm welcome!
540 And if I asked, they wouldn’t let a hated woman
on their haughty ships. Poor thing, don’t you
know or feel the treachery of Trojans yet?*
I could leave alone and join the swaggering
sailors, or take my Tyrians and my household
with me, ordering the group I barely
tore from Sidon to set sail again. No.
Die as you deserve; kill grief by the sword.
Sister, you did this: you yielded to my tears,
added ruin to my folly and betrayed me.
550 I could have lived in innocence, unwed
and free of grief, like a creature in the wild.
I broke the vow I made Sychaeus’ ashes.”
These cries burst from Dido’s broken heart
while Aeneas slept on his high stern,
set on going, all the preparations made.
As he dreamed, the same god came to him
149

and seemed to warn him once again. He was
like Mercury in every way, his voice,
his color and blond hair, a handsome youth.
560 “Goddess-born, can you sleep in such a crisis?
Are you crazy? Don’t you see the dangers all
around you, or hear the helpful west wind blowing?
She’s plotting treachery and terror, she’s set
on death and feeds the surges of her rage.
Won’t you get out while you can? All too soon
you’ll see the water churning with her ships,
torches burning, and the shore seething with flames,
if Dawn finds you lingering in these lands. Come!
No more waiting! Females are a fickle thing,
570 always prone to change.” He blended with black night.
Aeneas was aghast at the sudden vision.
He rose from sleep and roused his crew to action.
“Wake up, men, and man the benches! Hoist
the sails at once! A god sent from the upper air
urges us—again!—to slash the braided hawsers
and depart at once. We follow, sacred god,
whichever one you are; we gladly obey.
Stay with us, assist us: show us helpful
star-signs in the sky.” He seized his flashing sword
580 and struck the ropes with its bare blade. The same
fever gripped them all. They rushed to rig the sails
and leave the shore. The fleet covered the sea;
rowing hard, they swept the waves and churned up foam.
And now Dawn left Tithonus’ saffron bed
to pour fresh light upon the land. But when
150

Dido from her tower saw the first rays shining,
the fleet leaving with hoisted sails, and the shore
and harbor empty, the crew gone, she beat
her lovely chest three and four times, and tore
590 her golden hair. “O Jupiter! Will he go, then,
the foreigner who jeered at my kingdom?
Shouldn’t we grab every weapon in the city
and give chase? Hurry, drag ships from the docks,
take up torches, give out swords, pull on your oars!—
What words are these? Where am I? What’s this madness?
Poor Dido, do his impious actions touch you now?*
Better then, when you shared your rule. So much
for his pledges, the man they say carried his gods
and hauled his father, weak with age, upon his back!
600 I could have seized him, hacked him up, and thrown his body
in the sea! I could have killed his men, or
Ascanius himself, and served him to his father!
I might have failed, but I was dying anyhow:
Who was there to fear? I should’ve torched his camp
and fleet, snuffed out father, son, and all
their race, then thrown myself onto the pyre!
O Sun, who lights the world with flame, and Juno,
witness to my pain, enabler of our love,
and Hecate, howled to by night on city crossroads,
610 and vengeful Furies, gods of dying Dido:
direct your might at his deserving treachery
and hear my prayers. If that cursed man must reach
port and make it to the shore, if the fates
of Jupiter demand it and this end is fixed,
let him suffer war with daring tribes, banished
from his land, torn from Iülus’ embrace.
151

Let him beg for help and see the unjust deaths
of friends. And when he’s yielded to an unfair peace,
don’t let him enjoy his kingdom or sweet life.
620 Let him die too young, unburied on the sand.
I pour out this final prayer with my lifeblood.
Tyrians, you must torment his sons and all
his future race. Make this offering to my ashes.
Let there be no love or treaties between us.
Rise up from my bones, unknown avenger,
hunt the Dardan colonists with flames and swords,
now or any times there’s strength to strike!
My curse is this: our lands, our seas, our swords will clash.
The Trojans will fight wars for generations.”*

630 Now Dido’s thoughts went skidding here and there:

How soon could she end her hated life?
She spoke briefly to Barce,* Sychaeus’ nurse
(since her own was black ash in her former land):
“Nurse dear, fetch my sister Anna. Tell her
to sprinkle herself with spring water, and quickly
bring beasts and offerings for sacrifice.
That’s her task. You, put on a holy headband.
My plan’s to complete the rituals I started
for the Stygian god, and end my grief
640 by setting fire to the hateful Trojan’s pyre.”
The nurse dashed off with creaky zeal. But Dido,
wild and trembling at her awful plan,
her bloodshot eyes darting around, her cheeks
ashen and splotchy at her coming death,*
152

burst into the inner court and climbed the pyre,
beside herself. She unsheathed the Dardan’s sword,
a gift not meant for such a use. When she
saw the Trojan clothes and well-known bed,
she lingered for a bit with thoughts and tears,
650 then lay down and spoke her final words:
“Sweet remnants of love—sweet while god and fate
allowed—take this soul, free me from this grief.
I’m done with life; I’ve run the course Fate gave me.
Now my noble ghost goes to the Underworld.
I built a shining city, gazed upon its walls,
avenged my husband on my evil brother:
happy, all too happy, if only Trojan keels
had never touched my shores.” She buried her face
in the bed and cried, “I’ll die, though unavenged:
660 I choose to join the shades like this. Let the cruel
Trojan’s eyes drink in this fire from the sea,
and take with him the evil omen of my death.”
As she spoke, her servants saw her falling
on the sword. The blade bubbled with blood
and stained her hands. A cry went up in the high hall.
Rumors reeled around the shaken city.
Houses groaned with grief and women’s wails,
and the sky echoed the clamor, as if Carthage
or ancient Tyre were falling, and the enemy
670 were in the city—raging fires rolling through
the homes of men and temples of the gods.*
Her sister heard the noise and ran, half dead with fear.
She cut through the crowd, raking her face with nails,
pummeling her breast, and cried to dying Dido:
“This was your plan, my sister? You wanted to trick me?
153

The pyre, the flames and altar, were for this?
You left me with so much to grieve for! Did you
scorn my company? I’d have shared your fate:
one pain, one sword, one instant should have taken us.
680 Did I build the pyre and call upon our gods
just to be absent, heartlessly, as you lay here?
You’ve destroyed us both, sister, and our people
and the elders and your city. Let me wash
your wounds with water, let me touch my lips
to your last breath.” She climbed the steps and held
her dying sister, stroking her and sobbing,
staunching the dark blood with her own dress.
Dido tried to lift her heavy eyes again—
she couldn’t. The deep wound hissed inside her chest.
690 Three times she tried to rise, leaning on her elbow;
three times she fell back on the bed. With dimming eyes
she sought the light of sky, found it, and groaned.
Then almighty Juno, pitying her long
and painful death, sent Iris from Olympus
to free the trapped soul from its mortal bonds.
Because her death, poor thing, was not deserved
or fated, but premature and in the heat of passion,
Proserpina hadn’t plucked one of her golden
hairs yet, nor condemned her soul to Stygian Orcus.
700 So dewy Iris flew down on her saffron wings,
trailing a thousand colors through the sunlight.
She stopped over her head: “I take this offering
down to Dis, as told, and free you from your body.”
She cut a strand of hair. At once all warmth
slipped away; Dido’s life ebbed to the winds.
154

BOOK 5

TROJAN GAMES

Aeneas and his crew sailed out to sea.
Resolute, he cut through waters dark with wind,
gazing back at city walls lit up by flames—
poor Dido’s pyre. No one knew what caused the blaze,
but they knew the great grief of a love betrayed
and what a woman’s passion could unleash.
Their hearts were somber with foreboding.
When deep sea held the ships, and no land could
be seen—just sky and sea on every side—
10 dark rain-clouds settled overhead, bringing night
and storm; the waves bristled with shadow.
The pilot, Palinurus, cried from his high stern:
“Why so many cloud-banks closing on the sky?
What awaits us, father Neptune?” He told the crew
to trim the sails and bend to the strong oars,
bearing down out of the wind, and said: “Brave
Aeneas, not even if Jupiter would promise,
could I hope for Italy under these skies.
The winds have changed and roar across our path
20 from the dark west, the air thickens to mist.
We can’t resist or hold our course. Fortune
has defeated us: let’s follow where she calls.

155

The friendly shores and harbor of Sicilian Eryx
are close, if I remember rightly and can trace
our journey back by the same stars I charted here.”
Pious Aeneas replied: “That’s what these winds call for.
I’ve watched you struggle vainly for some time.
Change your route. No country has a greater
call on me, there’s no place I’d rather dock
30 our tired ships more than Acestes’ homeland,
whose soil cradles the bones of my father.”
They made for port. The west winds, now welcome,
filled the sails; the ships rode swiftly on the swells.
At last, with joy, they landed on familiar shores.
From a far hill, Acestes marveled at their coming
and went to meet the allied ships—a rough sight
with his spears and Libyan she-bear’s pelt.
Crinisus, a river-god, had sired him on
a Trojan mother. Mindful of his parents,
40 he rejoiced at their return, glad to help
the weary men with pleasing rustic riches.
When East’s bright dawn had driven out the stars,
Aeneas called the sailors to him from across
the shore, standing on a knoll to speak.
“Great Dardans, noble race of divine blood,
a year has passed, the months have turned full circle,
since we put my godlike father’s bones in earth
and offered sacrifice on his sad altars. Unless
I’m wrong, that day is here. I’ll always count it bitter,
50 but I’ll always honor it (as the gods wished).
On this day—whether I roamed the Libyan shoals
156

in exile, or were caught at sea or prisoned
in Mycenae—I’d observe my vow to offer
annual rites, and heap the altar with due gifts.
We stand before my father’s very bones and ash.
It was the will and power of the gods, I think,
that let us travel to a friendly port. So come:
let’s conduct this ceremony gladly.
We’ll ask for winds, and when our city’s built,
60 I hope to honor him in his own temple yearly.
Trojan-born Acestes offers you two bulls
for every ship. Summon our native gods
to feast, and those our host worships as well.
If the ninth day’s dawn brings gentle weather
and the sun’s rays light our mortal earth,
I’ll hold Trojan contests—first for the quick ships;
then the fastest runner; then for someone strong
and skilled with spears or flying arrows, or
brave at landing blows with rawhide boxing-gloves.*
70 All of you, come try to win a palm as prize.
And now hush: wreathe your heads with leaves.”
Aeneas bound his brow with Venus’ myrtle.
So did old Acestes, Helymus, and young
Ascanius. The others followed suit. Then he
left the gathering, going to the grave mound,
many thousands crowding all around him.
Now he duly poured onto the soil two bowls
each of unmixed wine, fresh milk, and holy blood.
He scattered purple flowers and prayed: “Sacred
80 father, once again I greet your ashes, shade,
and spirit, you whom I saved from Troy—but why,
157

since I was not allowed to look for Italy
with you, or those fated fields, or the unknown
Tiber?” At his words, a glistening snake slid out
from the tomb’s base, drawing seven giant coils.
It calmly circled round the mound and altars.
Its back was mottled with blue spots, its scales
gleamed bright with gold—like clouds behind a rainbow,
colored by the sun’s rays with a thousand hues.
90 Aeneas was stupefied to see it. The snake’s
long body glided through the polished cups
and bowls. It tried the feast, and harmlessly
went back inside the tomb, leaving the altars.
Aeneas renewed his father’s rites with still more zeal,
uncertain if the serpent was the place’s spirit
or Anchises’. He duly killed two sheep, two sows,
two heifers with black hides, and poured the wine
from bowls, calling on the soul of great
Anchises, the shade he wished to come from Acheron.
100 His men gladly offered gifts from what they had.
They heaped the altars high and killed the bulls.
Others, spread out through the grass, lined up
cauldrons, or roasted spitted meat on coals.
The day they’d waited for arrived: Phaëthon’s horses
brought the ninth dawn and a cloudless sky.
Acestes’ fame, his noble name, had roused
the local people. They thronged along the shore,
glad to see Aeneas’ men—and to compete.
First, trophies were put out for all to see:
110 sacred tripods, palms and leafy crowns,
prizes for the winners, as well as weapons,
158

robes dyed purple, gold and silver bars.
The bugle rang out from a mound: the games were on!
Four matching ships with heavy oars were chosen
from the fleet to enter the first race.
Mnestheus led the Kraken’s eager crew—he’d be
Italy’s Mnestheus of the Memmi clan.
Gyas led the giant ship Chimaera, its bulk
huge as a city. A Dardan crew propelled its
120 triple rows of oars and triple decks.
Sergestus, founder of the Sergian clan, captained
the massive Centaur. On the sea-green Scylla
rode Cloanthus—your ancestor, Cluentius.
Far out to sea, a boulder faced the foaming shore.
At times, when swollen waters pounded it and
winter winds concealed the stars, it was submerged.
In calmer skies, its level crown rose peacefully
above the sea, a pleasant stop for sunning gulls.
Here Aeneas propped a leafy oak-branch, a living
130 marker: it was the sailors’ sign to turn around
and circle back on their long course. Starting spots
were set by lot. Far off, on the sterns,
the captains stood out in their gold and purple.
The crews were crowned with poplar leaves; their bare backs
glistened, rubbed with oil. They took up seats
along the benches, arms taut on the oars, and waited, intent
on the signal. Their hearts pounded fiercely,
tense and desperate with desire for glory.
When the piercing bugle sang, the ships sprang
140 forward from their berths. The sailors’ cries struck
159

the high skies; taut arms strained to churn the sea,
plowing paths in parallel, tearing furrows
in the sea with oars and three-pronged beaks.
Not even speeding chariots, springing
from their stalls, devour racetracks with such speed,
when the drivers strike their team with rippling reins
and lean forward to snap the horses with the lash.
All the grove was roaring with the shouts
and cheers of fans. The sheltered shores echoed their cries.
150 The din pounded the hills and set them ringing.
As the crowd erupted, Gyas left the rest behind
and took the lead. Cloanthus was in second place.
His crew was better, but his boat was sluggish
from its weight. Behind them, neck to neck,
Centaur vied with Kraken, trying to seize the lead.
First Kraken, then huge Centaur ran ahead.
Then both raced together, prows aligned.
They split the salt sea with long keels. As they
neared the reefs, closing on the turning-post,
160 Gyas, leading at the midpoint of the race,
rebuked his pilot, Menoetes: “Why so far
to starboard? Steer this way! Hug the reef,
have the port oars graze it! Let the other boats stay
farther out!” But Menoetes feared the lurking
rocks and pulled the prow back out to sea.
Gyas cried again, “You’re off the course!
Steer for the rocks!”—and now he saw Cloanthus
on his tail, steering a tighter tack, cutting
to the left between the roaring rocks and
170 Gyas’ ship—and he glided to the front,
160

getting to safe water, leaving the post behind.
That was the last straw. Gyas flared up in
a fury, tears wetting his cheeks. Forgetting
dignity and the safety of his crew, he shoved
slow Menoetes from the stern into the sea
and took the rudder himself, urging on his team,
turning the tiller shoreward. When Menoetes,
heavy, surfaced from the depths at last,
an old man dripping in drenched clothes, he struggled
180 to the level rock and sat on its dry crown.
As he fell, as he swam, the Trojans laughed.
They laughed to see him vomit floods of sea.
Sergestus and Mnestheus, in last place,
rejoiced at the chance to overtake slow Gyas.
Near the rocks, Sergestus took the lead.
He was ahead, but not yet by a boat-length.
His rival Kraken’s prow was closing on him.
Mnestheus strode midships among his oarsmen
urging them: “Now’s the time to bend to oars,
190 men of Hector, whom I picked as comrades
in Troy’s final hour. Use the strength and spirit
you had in Libya’s shallows, the Ionian sea,
and the greedy waves of Cape Malea.
I don’t aim for victory and first place now
(and yet—but only you pick victors, Neptune);
but being last means disgrace! Fight it, men,
avoid this ignominy!” All bent to oars
in fierce rivalry. The bronze stern shuddered
with great strokes and the sea flew by. Gasps shook
200 their bodies and dry mouths, their sweat ran in streams.
161

And now chance brought the glory they desired:
Sergestus succumbed to lunacy and drove
his boat still closer to the rocks and into danger.
Unhappy man—his boat rammed onto jutting reefs.
The rocks shook and the oars snapped on sharp edges.
The damaged prow was wedged in place. With a shout
the crew leapt up to deal with the delay
and pulled the shattered oars in from the sea
with iron-plated poles and sharp-tipped hooks.
210 Mnestheus’ good luck here made him even keener.
A swift pull of oars, with the winds he prayed for,
put him near the shore as he returned—
like a dove abruptly startled from her nest,
where she and her sweet chicks hide in the rocks.
Flushed out, she darts in fear to the fields,
beating her wings loudly; but soon she glides
along the steady air and skims a sky-blue path.
So Mnestheus’ Kraken, heading homeward,
cut the waves, gliding after her first spurt.
220 He left Sergestus struggling in the spiky reefs
and shallows, calling out for help in vain,
learning how to race with broken oars.
Next, Mnestheus chased Chimaera’s giant bulk.
The boat had no pilot, and Gyas fell behind.
Now only Cloanthus led, already near
the goal. Mnestheus made a massive effort.

At this the shouting doubled. They all cheered
the ship in second place; the sky echoed the din.
162

One crew would hate to lose the glory of an honor
230 all but won. They’d trade their lives for victory.
The others were encouraged by success. Belief in
victory spurred them on. And perhaps they’d have
pulled ahead and won, but Cloanthus stretched
both hands to the waves and poured out prayers:
“Rulers of the sea, whose waters I now sail,
on shore I’ll gladly kill a white bull at your altars—
I’ll pay this vow, then throw the entrails in your
briny waves and pour you unmixed wine.”
Beneath the sea, Phorcus’ choir, the Nereïds,
240 and the virgin Panopea heard him.
Father Portunus himself propelled the boat
ahead. Quicker than south winds or flying arrows,
the vessel sped to land and settled in the harbor.
Then Anchises’ son, summoning them all,
had the herald loudly proclaim Cloanthus
as the victor, and veiled his brow with living laurel.
The crews picked prizes for their ships: for each,
wine, three bulls, and a large silver ingot.
Special gifts went to the captains: for the winner,
250 a gold-stitched cloak, richly worked along the edge
with Meliboean purple in a double wave.
A boy was woven on it, the prince of leafy Ida,
chasing swift stags with his spear—you could almost
hear him gasp. An eagle, bearer of Jove’s bolt,
plummeted to grab him with hooked claws.
The aged guardians vainly raised their hands
to heaven, and dogs barked madly at the sky.
The man in second place received a breastplate
made of golden chain mail, three layers thick,
163

260 which Aeneas himself had ripped from Demoleos

when he beat him near high Troy’s Simoïs: both
a thing of beauty and protection in a battle.
His slaves Phegeus and Sagaris could barely
hold it on their shoulders, but when Demoleos
wore it, he chased straggling Trojans at a run.
Third place was a matched pair of bronze cauldrons
and cups of silver that were rough with carved reliefs.
As they were proudly leaving with their prizes,
all with purple ribbons round their temples,
270 Sergestus, who for all his skill had barely wrenched
his ship off the sharp reefs, now pulled into harbor,
mocked, pride lost, oars gone, one tier disabled.
Just like a snake a bronze wheel crushes on the road,
or one smashed by a traveler’s cruel stone:
mangled and half-dead, it’s desperate
to glide away, but can’t. It keeps coiling
its long body, fiercely rearing up its neck,
hissing, eyes like fire; but the maimed part drags it
down, and the snake weaves knots and falls back
280 on itself—so the ship limped under oars.
Still, it spread full sails and reached the port.
Aeneas gave Sergestus the gift he’d pledged, happy
that the ship was safe, the crew on land.
The prize was a Cretan slave girl handy in
Minerva’s work, Pholoë; she nursed twin sons.
The contest over, pious Aeneas headed
to a grassy field hemmed in by woods
and curving hills. The middle of this valley
formed a natural racetrack. The hero arrived,
164

290 many thousands with him, and sat on a raised seat.

He offered gifts to lure any brave souls
eager to compete in running, and displayed
the prizes. Trojans and Sicilians gathered
from all sides. First Nisus and Euryalus,
the latter marked by beauty and green youth,
Nisus by his pious love for him. Next,
prince Diores, of Priam’s royal line,
then Salius and Patron, the first Acarnian,
the other a Tegean of Arcadian blood.
300 Next were two Sicilians, the woodsmen Helymus
and Panopes, followers of old Acestes;
and many others, lost since to tradition.
Among them all, Aeneas said: “Listen to
my words: you’ll be glad to hear them. Not one
of you will leave without a prize from me.
Each man will get two Cretan arrows bright
with polished iron, and a double-headed ax
embossed in silver, same for all. The first three
will get extra gifts, and olive wreaths to wear.
310 First place wins a horse with gorgeous trappings.
Second place, an Amazonian quiver
full of Thracian arrows, with a broad gold strap
tied with a shining gemstone clasp. The man
who’s third will leave happy with this Argive helmet.”
They took their spots. At the signal, suddenly
they sprang out from the gates and sped over
the distance, rushing on like storm-clouds. When they
saw the finish line, Nisus flashed into
first place, faster than winged lightning and
165

320 the wind. Next, but next by a long interval,

came Salius. Further back, Euryalus
was third, Helymus right behind him. Diores
was on Helymus’s heels in turn,
looming at his shoulder—and if the track
were longer, he’d have edged in front of him
or left in doubt who won third place. And now,
almost at the very end, they were closing
on the goal, exhausted, when unlucky
Nisus skidded in a pool of slippery blood
330 where bulls slaughtered for a sacrifice
had soaked the ground and lush green grass with gore.
He was already relishing his victory
when he fell, going down face-first.
He lay there in the filthy dung and sacred gore.
Even so, he remembered his love for
Euryalus. Rising from the slime, he tripped
Salius, who went tumbling to the earth.
To applause and friendly cheers, Euryalus
raced on to the triumph Nisus had granted.
340 Next was Helymus; Diores took third.
But Salius deafened the giant stadium
and the elders in front with loud cries: his prize
was stolen from him by a trick! Euryalus’
popularity and graceful tears protected
him—and his purity, so lovely in a
lovely boy. Diores loudly backed him up:
he’d lose third prize, if Salius won first.
Father Aeneas said, “Your gifts are safely yours.
No one will change the list of winners. But I
350 can pity the misfortune of my blameless friend.”
166

He gave Salius the huge pelt of a Libyan
lion, a load of shaggy fur and gilded claws.
Then Nisus said: “If the losers get such prizes
because you pity stumblers, what gift do I deserve?
I’d have won the crown of victory,
if not for the same bad luck that Salius had.”
He showed his face and body, slimed with filthy dung.
Aeneas, best of leaders, laughed and had
a shield fetched, Didymaön’s work, torn
360 by Trojans from the temple door of Neptune.
He gave the fine young man this gorgeous gift.

The race was over and the gifts distributed.
Now he said: “If there’s a man of ready heart
and courage, come, wrap your hands in hide, put up
your fists!” He set out double prizes for the boxing,
a bull with gilded horns and garlands for the victor,
a sword and handsome helmet to console the loser.
At once, the strongman Dares lifted up his head
and stood. A murmur rippled through the crowd.
370 He was the only one who’d boxed with Paris.
He’d knocked out the champion Butes, a giant
who claimed his lineage from Bebrycian
Amycus, and laid him dying on the yellow
sand, near the mound that held great Hector.
Such was the towering man who stood to fight.
He showed his muscled shoulders, stretching out
his arms in turn, throwing punches in the air.
He needed a rival: but who from that huge crowd
167

would dare to face the man and bind their hands with leather?
380 Thinking everyone had yielded him the prize,
Dares stepped up at once to where Aeneas sat,
grabbed the prize bull by the horn, and said:
“Goddess-born, if no one dares to fight with me,
how long must I stand? I shouldn’t have to wait.
Let me take the prize.” All the Trojans roared
in favor: he should be given what was promised!
But Acestes raked Entellus with harsh words
as they sat together on their grassy bench.
“Entellus, what’s the point of your great past
390 if you meekly let this great prize go without
a fight? What happened to your idol, the trainer
Eryx? Was he famous for no reason? What of
your glory throughout Sicily, the prizes hanging
in your house?” He answered: “Fear hasn’t dulled
my love of glory, but my blood is sluggish
with the slowness of old age. My strength is gone.
If I were in my youth, the same age that scoundrel
trusts in as he preens, if I were like that,
it wouldn’t take a prize for me to fight, or some
400 fancy steer. I don’t care about the gifts.”
He flung into the ring immensely heavy boxing
gloves that fierce Eryx had worn in his matches
when he’d bound his hands with the hard hide.
The crowd gasped at the huge gloves made of pelts
from seven giant bulls, stiff with lead and iron.
Dares himself gaped the most, and backed away.
Great-souled Aeneas handled the gloves’ weight,
the great mass of twisted bands of leather.
168

The old boxer said with spirit: “Imagine if
410 you’d seen the gloves of Hercules himself,
the grim struggle on this very shore!
Your brother Eryx* wore these gloves (look,
they’re smeared with blood and splattered brains)
to face great Hercules, and I wore them
while I still had strength and younger blood,
before old age sprinkled white hairs on my head.
But if my gloves scare Trojan Dares, and
pious Aeneas and Acestes are agreed,
let’s fight on equal terms. I’ll give up Eryx’
420 gloves, fear not, and you take off your Trojan ones.”
He threw the lined cloak from his shoulders, baring
his huge frame, his giant limbs and muscles,
and stood hulking in the center of the sand.
Father Aeneas brought out matching gloves,
and bound the hands of both with equal weight.
They stood on tiptoes, holding their arms high up
to the sky. Then they bobbed around,
keeping their heads out of range, feinting
with their hands, sparring for an opening.
430 Dares’ youth made him better on his feet.
Entellus’ strength was in his arms and bulk,
but his stiff knees shook, gasps racked his huge frame.
The men threw many useless punches, but landed
many too, hitting hollow flanks, thumping
each other’s chests. Often their hands strayed
to ears and heads. Their jaws rattled with the impact.
Entellus, solid and unmoving, stayed in place,
dodging blows by watching carefully and twisting.
Dares looked like he was laying siege and placing
169

440 catapults around a mountain fort or town.

He tried this route and that, probing everywhere
with skill, pressing him with varied jabs—no luck.
Entellus rose and raised his right arm high,
but Dares saw the blow aimed from above
and nimbly dodged it. The man squandered his strength
on the air, and worse still, himself heavy, tumbled
heavily, his vast bulk landing on the ground—
like a pine hollowed with age and torn up by
the roots on Mount Erymanthus or great Ida.
450 Excited, Trojans and Sicilians leapt up;
their shouts rose to the sky. Acestes, feeling pity,
quickly ran to lift his old friend from the ground.
But the hero wasn’t slowed or scared by falling.
He came back fiercer: his anger brought him strength.
Shame kindled him, and trust in his own skill.
He chased Dares round the ring in fury, landing
endless blows with both his fists. There was no pause,
no chance to rest. He was like a hailstorm
rattling roofs—so dense were the punches that
460 the hero rained on Dares, pounding him all over.
Father Aeneas didn’t let this fury last—
Entellus was berserk with bitter rage.
He stopped the match, pulling out exhausted
Dares, and soothed him with these words. “Poor man,
have you lost your mind? Don’t you see
his strength is not his own, but backed by gods?
Give in to their power.” So the contest ended.
Dares’ faithful friends hauled him to the ships.
His knees couldn’t support him and his head flopped
170

470 side to side. He was vomiting thick clots

of blood and teeth. His helpers were called back
to fetch the sword and helmet, but the palm and bull
were for Entellus. He was in high spirits,
puffed up by his prize. “Goddess-born Aeneas,
and you Trojans, see what strength I had
when young, see the death from which you’ve rescued
Dares.” Then he stood before the bullock,
his prize for victory, pulled back his right fist,
and slammed the heavy glove between its horns.
480 The skull caved in, spilling out the brains,
and the bull collapsed to earth and twitched in death.
Over it he poured these heartfelt words: “Eryx,
I offer you this life for Dares’; better so.
I won. Now I’ll retire my gloves and talent.”
Aeneas next invited anyone who wanted
to compete in archery, and named the prizes.
With great strength, he lifted the mast from Sergestus’
ship.* Feeding a rope through the top,
he attached a fluttering dove: their arrows’ goal.
490 The contestants came and threw their lots
in a bronze helmet. To loud cheers, first place
went to Hippocoön, Hyrtacus’ son. Next,
Mnestheus, who’d placed in the ship race, still wreathed
with the olive leaves around his brow.
Eurytion was third—famed Pandarus’ brother,
who was told to break the treaty back at Troy
and aimed his bow into the mass of Greeks.
Last from the deep helmet came Acestes’ name.
He too dared to try the task of younger men.
171

500 Each man bent his pliant bow, putting muscle

into it, pulling arrows from his quiver.
From the twanging bow of young Hippocoön
the first vibrating shaft sliced through the air.
It flew straight to the wooden mast and stuck.
As the mast shuddered, the dove fluttered
in fear. The whole place rang with loud applause.
Next keen Mnestheus stood and drew his bow.
He pointed high, aiming both eye and arrow
at the mark. He didn’t manage to impale
510 the bird—bad luck—but he broke the knotted rope
around her foot that tied her to the mast.
The dove, released, flew southward to dark clouds.
Eurytion had long since held his arrow taut
and his bow drawn. Praying to his brother,
he peered for the dove as she beat her wings
in joy in the empty sky, rising to the night,
and shot her. She fell lifeless, leaving her soul
in the stars, returning the lodged arrow.
Acestes was still there, but the prize was gone.
520 He shot his arrow to the heavens anyhow
to show his veteran skill and ringing bow.
And then, a sudden miracle took place, important
in the future*—as its fulfillment showed,
when stern prophets at last knew its meaning.
Soaring through the empty sky, the arrow
blazed a flaming path, then vanished in the breeze,
like a shooting star falling from the heavens
that draws its shining trail across the sky.
The Trojans and Sicilians were amazed
172

530 and called upon the gods. Great Aeneas did not

reject the omen. He hugged happy Acestes,
heaping him with lavish gifts, and said:
“Take these, father. The great king of Olympus
shows by such signs you’ll win honors like no
other. This prize belonged to aged Anchises,
a bowl embossed with figures. Thracian Cisseus
gave it him long ago, a handsome gift,
a token of himself and a pledge of love.”
He ringed Acestes’ brows with living laurel
540 and named him winner, first among them all.
Good Eurytion readily gave up his place
though he alone shot down the soaring bird.
The man who broke the rope was next in gifts,
last, the one whose arrow was wedged in the mast.
Before the contest ended, Aeneas summoned Iülus’
friend and guardian, Epytides, and told
those loyal ears: “Go and tell Ascanius,
if his boy troops are prepared, and their horses
marshaled in straight rows, to lead them in
550 and show himself in armor, in honor of his
grandfather.” He told the crowd packed in the lengthy
circuit to clear out, leaving the fields empty.
The boys advanced before their parents’ eyes,
shining on their bridled horses. Trojans and
Sicilians roared in admiration as they passed.
Their hair was bound with cropped wreaths in the old way.
Each held double iron-tipped cornel lances,
some slung polished quivers on their back.
Soft coils of twisted gold sat on their collarbones.
173

560 Three squadrons with three captains galloped in.

Twelve boys were in each group. The separate ranks
gleamed brightly, following their leaders. One glad
troop of boys was led by little Priam,
his grandfather’s namesake—Politus’ child, future
father of Italians. He rode a Thracian horse,
a tall prancing piebald with white brow and
pasterns. Next came Atys. The Latin Atii
trace their clan and ancestry to him—
little Atys, a boy loved by the boy Iülus.
570 Last, and handsome past the rest, Iülus
steered a Sidonian horse that lovely Dido
gave him to remember her, a pledge of love.
The others rode on old Acestes’ native
steeds. The Dardans watching clapped to see
the anxious boys, feeling joy at the sight:
young faces that recalled passed generations.
Happy on their horses, the boys circled the field
before their parents’ eyes. From a distance,
Epytides yelled and cracked his whip: the sign.
580 Each troop split in equal halves who rode apart.
At the call, they wheeled back to meet again
and charged with spears—a military tactic.
One side wove a pattern, the other mirrored it.
They formed intersecting circles riding left
and right. Their play looked like armed battle.
At times they risked their backs in flight, at times attacked
with swords, at times rode in peaceful pairings.
Just so the Labyrinth in high Crete, they say,
was woven of blind walls, its paths an enigma
590 of a thousand forking ways that foiled all clues,
174

each slip uncaught and irrevocable.
The sons of Troy tangled their horses’ paths,
weaving battles and retreats in play,
like dolphins cutting Libyan and Carpathian waters
as they skim the seas and breach the waves.
Ascanius renewed this custom and this contest
for his horsemen when he circled Alba Longa
with her walls. He taught the native Latins
to observe it as he did with the young Trojans.
600 The Albans taught their own children; great Rome
inherited and kept the ancient ritual.
The boys now stand for “Troy,” the troops are “Trojan.”
These were the games observed in honor of Anchises.
And now Fortune changed and showed her perfidy.
As they performed games for the annual rites, Juno
hurried Iris earthward to the Trojan fleet,
backing her with wind, scheming, not yet
satiated in her ancient grudge.
Iris flew along the rainbow’s thousand hues.
610 Her quick descent was seen by none. She sighted
the giant gathering, and, on the shore,
the deserted harbor, the abandoned fleet.
On the empty beach, the Trojan women
wept for lost Anchises, looking at the ocean
through their tears. They deplored the many reefs
and voyages that faced their weary people still.
Sick of sea and hardship, they longed to settle.
Iris mixed among them, no novice in the art
of harm. She shed her goddess’s clothes and face
620 and became Beroë, Doryclus’ old wife,
175

who’d once had a family and famous sons.
She pushed through the Trojan women, saying:
“Unlucky us, that Greek hands didn’t haul us off
to die in war beneath our country’s walls!
Unhappy race, what does Fortune have in store?
This is the seventh summer since Troy’s fall, and still
we bear this journey through the lands and seas,
the hostile reefs and skies, chasing receding
Italy through endless seas. We’re on land
630 owned by our kinsman Eryx and our host Acestes.
Who’ll stop us from laying walls for our own town?
O fatherland, and gods saved from the Greeks in vain,
will no city be called Troy? Will we never
see Simoïs and Xanthus, Hector’s rivers?
Come, help me set these cursed ships on fire.
In my sleep, I saw the prophetess Cassandra
handing me lit torches: ‘Seek Troy here,’ she said.
‘This is your home.’ Now’s the time for action:
such omens call for no delay. I see right here
640 four altars raised to Neptune. He’ll give us fire—and daring.”
She was the first to seize a deadly torch.
With effort, she held it high, swung it, and threw.
The women were shocked and stupefied.
Now the oldest woman in the crowd,
Pyrgo, royal nurse to many sons of Priam,
said: “Women, this is not Doryclus’ wife,
Beroë. Note the signs of divine beauty,
her burning eyes, her bravery. Look at
her face, how she sounds and how she walks.
650 I myself just left Beroë. She was sick,
and sad that she alone would miss the rites
176

and could not pay Anchises his due honors.”
At first the women were divided: they stared
at the ships with angry looks, torn between
fierce longing for their present spot
and the lands to which Fate called. Iris rose up
through the sky on level wings, and as she left,
she drew a massive rainbow in the clouds.
Now they shouted louder, maddened by
660 the omen. Some snatched fire from nearby hearths,
others robbed the altars. They hurled branches, leaves,
and burning torches at the ships. Fire raged
amok over the seats and oars and painted sterns.
Eumelus brought the message to the gathering
around Anchises’ tomb: the ships were burning!
Looking back, they saw a rising billow of black ash.
Ascanius, just now happily leading
his troops, galloped fiercely to the chaos
at the ships. His breathless guardians couldn’t catch him.
670 “What’s this new madness, my poor citizens?” he cried.
“What are you doing? It’s not hostile camps of Greeks
you set on fire, it’s hope itself! Look, I’m your
Ascanius!” He threw his helmet at his feet,
the one he wore to play at battle. Aeneas
and a band of Trojans rushed up too.
But the women scattered fearfully along
the shore to hide in any rocky nook or wood.
They shunned daylight and their deed. Sane again,
Juno driven from their hearts, they knew the men.
680 But this didn’t stop the flames, or sap their wild

177

strength. Beneath the sodden wood, the pitch
was live, spewing smoke and smoldering,
eating at the hulls, wrecking the ships’ frames.
Heroic strength and streams of water were no use.
Pious Aeneas tore his clothing from his chest,
stretched out his hands, and begged the gods for help:
“Almighty Jupiter, if you don’t hate the Trojans
one and all, if your former piety
still cares for human suffering, let our ships
690 survive, save our fragile hopes from death.
Or if we merit it, kill what’s left of us
with your deadly bolt, drown us by your hand.”
He’d hardly finished when a dark storm broke out
with a violent downpour. The fields and steep hills
shook with thunder. Dark rain poured in sheets
across the sky, driven by the strong south wind.
The ships filled up with water. It soaked their half-burned
timbers until all the smoke and flames were out.
The hulls, except for four, were saved from ruin.

700 Aeneas was shattered by this bitter loss.

His grave concerns pulled him this way and that:
Should they forget their destiny and stay
in Sicily, or aim for the Italian coast?
Then old Nautes, Athena’s only student,
who’d been famous for his foresight (the goddess
always told him what the gods’ great rage
would bring, and what the chain of fate required),
this Nautes comforted Aeneas. “Goddess-born,
178

let’s follow where fate draws us, even if we backtrack.
710 Come what may, we’ll win out by endurance.
Dardanian Acestes comes from divine stock.
Entrust this willing partner with your plans
and set him over those who’ve lost their ships
or are sick of your great project and your fate.
Pick old men and women wearied by the sea,
all the weak, all who fear the risks,
and let these tired people have their city here:
if you permit, they’ll call the place Acesta.”
His old friend’s advice disturbed Aeneas,
720 and now his worries tore at him still more.
As black Night in her chariot drove across
the heavens, suddenly the image of Anchises,
his father, came to him, descending from the skies:
“Son, dearer than my life while I had life,
so troubled by Troy’s fate: I visit you
at Jupiter’s command. He drove the fire
from your ships, at last showing pity.
Follow the fine counsel that old Nautes gives:
take only chosen men, the bravest hearts,
730 to Italy. In Latium there’ll be a harsh
and rustic race for you to crush. But first,
come to Dis’s hellish home. I’ll be by deep
Avernus. Impious Tartarus’s sullen shades
don’t keep me; Elysium’s my home, and the lovely
gatherings of the good. Chaste Sibyl will bring you
once you’ve offered pools of blood from black-skinned sheep.
You’ll learn about your people and your city.
Now goodbye: damp Night wheels in her mid-course,
179

I can feel the breath of cruel Dawn’s horses.”
740 He dissolved like smoke into thin air.
Aeneas cried: “Now where are you rushing,
and from whom? Who stops us from embracing?”
Then he woke the sleeping fire’s embers
and humbly worshiped Trojan Lar and white-haired
Vesta’s shrine with sacred grain and incense.
Next Aeneas called his friends, Acestes first,
to tell them Jupiter’s command, his dear
father’s guidance, and what he had decided.
Their debate was short: Acestes said yes.
750 They formed a colony of women and the willing,
people with no need for boundless glory.
The rest repaired the rowers’ benches and the timbers
eaten by the fire, adding new oars and ropes.
They were few, but spirited in war.
Aeneas sketched out city limits with a plow,
assigning homes. He called the districts Ilium
and Troy. Trojan Acestes loved his kingdom.
He formed a court and gave laws to new senators.
On Eryx’ summit, near the stars, they built a shrine
760 to Venus of Idalia. A priest and sacred
grove were granted to Anchises’ tomb.
Now nine days of feasting passed. The altars
had been honored and calm winds smoothed the seas.
The south wind called them to the deep again.
A gale of lament went up along the curving
shore: they embraced, delayed a day and night.
The very men and mothers who’d found the sea
180

too harsh, the gods’ power unbearable,
now wanted to endure the pain of exile.
770 In tears himself, good Aeneas offered comfort
with kind words and left them with Acestes.
He ordered three calves killed for Eryx, a lamb
for the Storms. Then he had the mooring loosened.
He stood high on the prow holding a bowl,
his head ringed with olive leaves, and poured
clear wine and entrails on the briny sea.
Eagerly, the sailors swept the sea with oars.
As they sailed, a fair wind rose behind them.
But meanwhile Venus, distraught, went to speak
780 to Neptune. She poured out passionate complaints.
“Neptune, Juno’s fierce rage and stubborn heart
force me to stoop to every kind of plea.
Time’s passage doesn’t soften her, nor piety.
She’s unbowed by Jupiter’s commands and Fate.
Her malice has devoured a Phrygian city,
dragged the scraps of Troy through every torture.
But that’s not enough—she persecutes dead bones
and ashes! Her rage makes sense to her alone.
You saw yourself the trouble she caused recently
790 on the Libyan waves, mingling sea and sky,
unwisely betting on Aeolus’ storms.
She dared this in your realm. She even set
the Trojan women on a path of crime:
they burned the ships, sank the fleet, and forced
the men to leave their friends on unknown shores.
I beg of you, let the rest sail safely,
let them reach Laurentian Tiber—if this is right,
181

if the goddesses of Fate give them this city.”
Then Saturn’s son, tamer of the deep seas, said:

800 “You’ve every right to trust my kingdom, Venus:

you were born in it. And I’ve earned this trust:
I’ve often stopped the sky and sea’s great frenzy.
On land no less, I helped Aeneas; Simoïs
and Xanthus can attest to it. When Achilles
pinned the panicked Trojans to the walls,
sending thousands to their deaths, stopping up
the groaning streams so Xanthus couldn’t reach
the sea, I rescued Aeneas in a cloud
as he fought brave Achilles, a greater man
810 in strength and dearer to the gods, even though
I wanted to uproot Troy’s lying walls—the walls
I built!* I haven’t changed my mind; let go your fear.
He’ll reach Avernus’ harbor safely, as you wish.
There’ll only be one man to mourn for, lost at sea.
One life will pay for many.” So Neptune soothed
and cheered the goddess’s heart. Then he yoked
his wild horses with their golden harness
damp with foam, and fed out rein. He sped across
the ocean’s surface in his sea-blue chariot.
820 Under the thundering axles, waves sank down,
swells subsided, and the clouds dissolved.
Up came his many-shaped companions, giant whales,
Glaucus’ old troop, Palaemon, Ino’s son,
speedy Tritons, all of Phorcus’ army, Thetis,
Panopea and Melite at his left,
182

Thalia, Nesaea, Cymodoce, Spio.
At this a calm joy lulled Aeneas’ anxious mind.
He ordered that the masts be raised at once
and the sails be stretched out on the yardarms.
830 As one, the crew hauled on the ropes, letting out
the canvas to the left and right. As one
they turned the high yards; fair winds moved the fleet.
Palinurus, in the front, led the dense
armada. The rest were told to tack his course.
Damp Night was near the midpoint of the sky,
and the sailors, sprawling by their oars
on rigid benches, were resting peacefully,
when Sleep, gliding from the stars above,
breached the dark and chased away the shadows,
840 looking for you, Palinurus, bringing fatal
slumber to a guiltless man.* In Phorbas’ shape,
the god sat on the ship’s high stern and made his pitch:
“Palinurus, Iäsus’ son, the seas themselves
propel us, the winds blow evenly—there’s time to rest.
Lay down your head, steal your tired eyes from work.
I’ll take on your duties for a while.”
Palinurus barely glanced at him: “You ask
me of all men to trust the sea’s calm face
and quiet waves, to have faith in this monster?
850 As if I’d leave Aeneas to the lying breezes!
The clear skies’ treachery has fooled me many times.”
He held the tiller tight, not letting go,
and fixed his eyes upon the stars above.
Then the god shook over him a branch that dripped
with Lethe’s dew and drugs of Stygian strength.
183

It shut his swimming eyes against his will.
He’d hardly slumped in unexpected rest
when Sleep bent over him and pitched him in the sea.
As he fell, he ripped the rudder from the stern,
860 calling often on his friends, but unheard.
Sleep rose on his wings into the sheer air
and the fleet sailed on as safely as before,
unperturbed, as father Neptune had assured.
As Aeneas’ ship approached the Sirens’ crags
(once treacherous and white with many bones)
where boulders battered by the surf roared endlessly,
he realized he was drifting with no pilot. Groaning
deeply, he himself took up the helm across
the midnight sea, sick at heart for his friend’s fate:
870 “Ah, Palinurus, rashly trusting in calm winds
and sky, you’ll lie unburied on an unknown shore.”

184

BOOK 6

A VISIT TO HADES

So he said, in tears, and gave the fleet free rein.
At last they glided into Cumae’s bay
and turned the prows to face the sea. The anchor’s
bite secured the ships; the shore was fringed
with curving keels. Young men sprang out eagerly
onto the sand of Italy. Some tried to strike out
sparks from flint’s deep veins, others scoured the forest,
home to many beasts, or noted streams they’d found.
Pious Aeneas made for great Apollo’s temple
10 and the vast cave nearby, the sanctuary
of dread Sibyl, into whom the Delian seer
breathes his mind and mission, unveiling the future.
They neared the gold-roofed temple in Diana’s grove.
It’s said that Daedalus, fleeing Minos’ kingdom,
trusted himself to the sky on sweeping wings,
taking this unusual passage to the frosty
North. At last he floated down on Chalcis’ peak.
Back on land, he pledged Phoebus his wings—
his oars for flight—and built a lofty shrine.
20 On its doors he carved Androgeos’ death
and the Athenians who paid an awful price,*
seven sons each year: an urn holds the lots.
185

Facing this, the land of Crete soars from the sea.
Here’s Pasiphae’s ruinous passion for a bull,
their stealthy coupling, and their son, the hybrid
Minotaur, a monument to awful lust.
Here’s his lair, the labyrinth of no return.
But its builder Daedalus took pity on
a princess’ love,* and solved the tangled turns,
30 guiding Theseus’ blind footsteps with a thread.
Icarus, you’d be here too, if grief allowed.
Twice your father tried to carve your fall in gold,
twice his hands fell from his work. Aeneas wanted
to scan every detail, but Achates, sent
ahead, returned with Glaucus’ child Deiphobe,
priestess of Diana and Apollo. She said:
“This is no time to be gaping at the sights.
Kill seven bulls who’ve never felt the yoke
and just as many sheep.” His men were quick
40 to carry out the sacred task. Then the priestess
called the Trojans into her high temple.
There’s a cliff at Cumae whose vast flank is cut
into a cave with openings to a hundred shafts.
Through them rush the Sibyl’s answers, hundredfold.
As they reached the cave, she cried: “We must consult
the oracle at once: look, the god is present!”
At the door, her complexion changed, her hair
sprang loose, she began to pant: her heart was full
of frenzy. She seemed taller, and her voice
50 was not a human’s, for Apollo was approaching
and she felt his breath. “Trojan Aeneas!” she cried.
“You hesitate to offer vows? Yet only then
186

will the mighty jaws that shake this cavern open
wide and awe us.” Silence. A chill shiver swept
the Trojans’ hardy bones. Their king prayed from his heart:
“Phoebus, you who always pitied Troy’s great pain,
who directed Paris’ arrow to pierce Achilles,
you’ve led my voyage through the many seas
that flow around the continents—to far
60 Massilian tribes, to fields that fringe the Syrtes.
At last we’ve come to Italy’s receding shores.
Don’t let Ilium’s fate still hound us. All you gods
and goddesses: if Troy and her great fame were once
an aggravation, now with justice you may
spare the race of Pergamum. Holy priestess,
you who see the future, let the Trojans live
in Latium (I only claim land owed to me
by Fate) with their straying, storm-tossed gods.
I’ll raise a shrine of solid marble to Phoebus*
70 and Diana, and choose feast days for Apollo.
Once I rule, I’ll build a great shrine for you too,
kind Sibyl. I’ll include the secret prophecies
you told my people, and consecrate your priests.
But don’t entrust your oracles to leaves, or they’ll
end up muddled, playthings spun by whirling
breezes. Chant them yourself, I beg.” He stopped.
The Sibyl still could not accept Apollo.
She spiraled through the cave, trying to force
the great god from her mind. But he wore her out
80 still more, and forced the seer to his will.
On their own, the hundred huge shafts of the cave
swung open, wafting out her answers. “Trojans:
187

you’ve left behind the sea’s great risks at last,
but graver ones remain on land. The Dardans
will attain Lavinian land (let go this worry),
but they’ll wish they hadn’t. I see brutal wars
and bloody torrents frothing in the Tiber.
There too you’ll find a Simoïs, a Xanthus, and
Greek camps. In Latium you’ll find a new Achilles,
90 he too a goddess’s son. And worse, there’s Juno
everywhere. A poor supplicant, how many
towns and tribes of Italy you’ll beg for help!
The cause of so much trouble for the Trojans?
Again a foreign bride, a foreign wedding.
Don’t give up at these misfortunes. Be as brave
as Fortune lets you. The first path to safety
will surprise you: it’ll appear in a Greek city.”
The Sibyl sang these fearsome riddles
in her shrine, wrapping truth in darkness
100 as her cave echoed round her, as Apollo
flicked her reins and sank his spurs in deeper.
When her seizure ended and her ravings stopped,
the hero Aeneas spoke. “No aspect of these
labors is unknown to me. I’ve foreseen
them all, and thought about each one of them. I ask
one thing. It’s said this spot’s a doorway to Hell’s
ruler and the murky swamp of Acheron.
Let me see my dear father face to face:
teach me how, open the sacred portal.
110 He was the one my shoulders saved from flames
and a thousand hostile spears all around us.
He shared my journey. At my side he took on
188

all the oceans, all the threats of sky and sea,
a feeble man bearing a fate beyond old age.
He even begged me to approach your doors
and seek you as a supplicant. I pray,
be kind, pity a father and his son. You can:
Hecate granted you Avernus’ groves to rule.
If Orpheus could summon his wife’s shade
120 with his Thracian lyre’s melody,
if Pollux shared his brother’s death, and often
took his place in Hell—and what of Theseus
and Hercules? My blood too is that of Jove.”
He grasped the altar, praying, and the Sibyl spoke.
“Anchises’ Trojan son, born of divine blood,
it’s easy to descend into Avernus.
Night and day the door of dusky Dis lies open.
To trace your steps and see the light again:
here’s the toil and effort. A few, justly loved
130 by Jove, whom blazing courage carried to the sky,
succeeded—sons of gods. Forest fills the center;
the dark embrace of Cocytus surrounds it.
But if this urge compels you, if you must indulge
this folly, twice crossing the Stygian swamp,
twice seeing black Tartarus, hear then
your first task. A golden branch with golden
leaves and stubborn golden stems hides in the murky
foliage of Proserpina’s sacred tree,
concealed by forest and the valley’s gloom. None
140 may penetrate the hidden alcoves under earth
until they’ve plucked its golden growth: lovely
Proserpina ruled that it must be a gift
189

for her. If one branch is plucked, a new one
takes its place, and grows gold leaves as well.
Scour the deep woods. Once you’ve spotted it,
pluck it off by hand. If you’re the one fate calls,
it’ll break off easily. If not, no force,
no blade, will help you tear it off. Also:
I have sad news. A friend’s corpse lies along
150 the shore and pollutes the fleet with death
while you seek advice and loiter at my door.
First take him to his resting-place and bury him.
Then offer black cattle—the first expiation.
This way you’ll see the Stygian groves at last,
the lands barred to the living.” Her mouth snapped shut.
Aeneas left the cave, walked on. He stared
sadly at the ground as he considered
this blind turn of events. Loyal Achates
kept him company and shared his worries.
160 They covered many topics as they talked:
What friend did the Sibyl mean, what body
needed burial? And then they saw Misenus
on the sandy shore, his life cut short unfairly,
Aeolus’ son Misenus, most skilled of men
to fire up hearts for battle with his bugle’s blare.
Marked out by his spear and trumpet, he used
to fight next to his friend, great Hector. When
victorious Achilles robbed Hector of life,
this bravest of heroes joined Aeneas
170 as companion, following no lesser leader.
But when he seized his hollow horn to make the seas
resound, challenging the gods in song (the fool!),
190

jealous Triton grabbed him up, if the tale
is true, and drowned him in the rocky surf.
They all raised loud laments around the body,
pious Aeneas the most, then carried out
the Sibyl’s orders. In tears, they heaped logs on
the pyre and strove to raise it to the sky.
They entered ancient woods and wild lairs.
180 Pine trees fell, holm-oaks rang to axes’ strikes,
oaks and ash trees fissured as the axmen drove in
wedges. They rolled huge rowans down the hills.
Aeneas led the work and spurred the men.
His tools were theirs. But in his somber heart
he thought of what he’d learned, and gazed over
the far-flung forest. Just then by chance he prayed:
“I wish the golden branch would show itself
in this vast wood right now—since what the Sibyl said
of you, Misenus, turned out all too true.”
190 At his words, twin doves flew down from the sky,
landing on the grassy sod before him.
The great hero knew his mother’s birds
and gladly prayed: “Be my guides, if there’s a path,
and wing your way into the woods, wherever
that lush branch casts shade on loamy soil.
And you, my goddess mother, help me in my
hour of need.” He spoke, and stopped to see
what signs the doves gave, where they went.
As they fed, the birds flitted from spot to spot,
200 always staying in his line of sight.
When they reached Avernus’ jaws and reeking gorge,
they quickly rose, gliding through the crystal air,
191

and perched right where he’d hoped, on the dappled tree.
The gold’s shining aura shimmered through the branches.
It looked like mistletoe in winter’s cold, when
its green leaves ring around a foster-tree’s
smooth trunk, the yellow flowers blooming. This was
how the shining gold appeared, growing
on the shadowed oak, rustling in the breeze.
210 At once Aeneas grabbed it. He snapped it eagerly
as it held on,* and took it to the priestess’ shrine.
On the shore, the Trojans mourned Misenus,
offering last rites for his thankless embers.
They raised a massive pyre, fragrant with pine
and planks of oak, then wove dark foliage
along its sides and set up gloomy cypresses
in front. His gleaming armor crowned the top.
Some prepared hot water, boiling it in cauldrons.
They washed and anointed the cold corpse
220 and set the man they wept for on a bier, groaning,
giving him the purple robes owed to the dead.
Others raised the massive litter, an unhappy
duty, and set a torch below, eyes averted
for the rite. A pile of gifts went up in flames:
frankincense and foodstuff, olive oil in bowls.
When the blaze collapsed into gray cinders,
they washed the thirsty ashes, his remains, with wine.
Corynaeus laid the bones in a bronze urn
and walked around the men three times with sacred
230 water—the dew of a fertile olive branch—
sprinkling it to cleanse them, saying the last words.
Pious Aeneas built the tomb, a giant barrow
192

topped off with Misenus’ armor, oar, and trumpet
below a looming bluff now called Misenus
after him. The name will last through all the ages.
Next he quickly carried out the Sibyl’s orders.
There is a deep and yawning cave, its mouth
a giant jagged gape. A black lake and a forest’s
shadow shield it. No bird can wing its way
240 across it with impunity: so putrid is
the breath its black jaws pour out to the upper air.
For this the Greeks called it Avernus, birdless.
The priestess set four steers with pitch-black hides
before the altar. She poured wine on their heads
and plucked the tall bristles between their horns
to throw into the sacred flames as offerings.
Next she called on Hecate, who moves Heaven
and Hell. They cut the steers’ throats and caught
warm blood in bowls. Aeneas’ sword struck down
250 a black lamb for the Furies’ mother, Night, and her
sister, Earth; a barren cow for Proserpina.
He lit night altars to the Stygian king,
setting whole bulls on the flames, pouring
fatty oil over the burning entrails.
At the rising sun’s first rays, the ground rumbled
and forest ridges shook. As Hecate approached,
dogs seemed to howl through the half-light.
“Get out, get out, unholy ones,” the Sibyl cried.
“Leave all the grove behind! And you, Aeneas,
260 quickly grab your weapon from its sheath.
Now you must be brave and resolute.”
Raving, she flung herself into her open cave.
193

Aeneas kept pace, and not with timid steps.
O gods who govern souls, O silent shades, Chaos,
Phlegethon, and mute expanses of the night,
let it be right to tell what I have heard, let me
show what’s buried deep in earth and darkness.
They went, faded figures in the lonely night,
through the lifeless, empty realm of Dis,
270 as if through a wood under a clouded moon’s
thin light, when Jove has plunged the sky in shadow
and black night leaches color from the world.
At the entrance, in Orcus’ very jaws,
Grief and vengeful Sorrow made their beds,
and Pale Diseases, sad Old Age, and Fear
and ill-advising Hunger and shameful Poverty,
forms horrible to see, and Death and Suffering,
then Death’s brother Slumber, and the Joys
of evil men. Facing them were murderous War
280 and the Furies’ iron chambers and mad Discord,
her serpent hair bound up with bloody ribbons.
There a giant dark-leafed elm spread out
its ancient branches. They say false Dreams
live on it, clinging under every leaf.
Many other ghastly forms of freaks
were stabled by the doors: Centaurs, biform Scylla,
Briareus’ hundred arms, the beast of Lerna
hissing horribly, Chimaera breathing fire,
Gorgons, Harpies, and the ghost of three-trunked
290 Geryon. Aeneas shook with sudden fear.
He grabbed his sword and held its naked edge to them.
194

If his wise guide hadn’t chided him that these
were insubstantial wraiths and flitting images,
he’d have rushed to slash the shadows pointlessly.
From here began the path to hellish Acheron’s
violent whirls of water. It seethed and swirled,
belching sand into the river Cocytus.
Filthy Charon, wearing stinking rags,
ferried ghosts across the stream. His lengthy
300 beard was matted stiff, his eyes stared fixed
and fierce. A dirty wrap was tied around his neck.
He poled the boat himself, tending to the sails,
toting bodies in the dingy raft. He was old,
but it was the green and raw old age of gods.
All the crowd came streaming to this shore:
mothers, men, the lifeless bodies of brave
heroes, boys and unwed girls, sons placed
on the pyre before their parents’ eyes—
as many as the forest leaves that fall
310 in autumn’s early chill, as many as
the birds who flock to land from sea when winter
drives them south to sunny lands. There
they stood, pleading to be first to cross,
stretching longing hands toward the farther bank.
The surly boatman took now some, now others.
The rest he shoved far from the sandy shore.
Aeneas was surprised and moved to see the tumult.
He asked: “Why are they rushing to the stream?
What do these souls want? Why are some left behind
320 while others sweep black water with the oars?”
The ancient priestess answered in few words:
195

“Anchises’ son, the gods’ true child, you see
the sluggish depths of Cocytus and Styx,
by which gods fear to swear false oaths. All this
crowd you see lacks burial—or any recourse.
The ferryman is Charon; his passengers have graves.
He can’t carry anyone across the awful
roaring waters till their bones find rest.
They flit around these shores one hundred years.
330 At last they board and reach the bank they’ve craved.”
Anchises’ son stopped still and stood, mulling over
many things. He pitied these souls’ unfair fate.
He saw Leucaspis and Orontes, leader of
the Lycian fleet, both sad without funerals.
The south wind had submerged the men and ships
as they sailed on storm-swept seas from Troy.
Now the helmsman Palinurus passed by him.
Lately, on the course from Libya, as he read
the stars, he’d toppled from the stern into deep sea.
340 Aeneas, barely making out his sad form
in the gloom, cried out his name. “What god stole you
from us, and threw you in the sea? Tell me.
I’ve never found Apollo false, but when
he spoke of you he lied: he prophesied
that you’d stay safe across the sea to Italy.
Is this how he keeps his word?” But the helmsman
said, “Apollo’s cauldron didn’t lie to you,
my lord, Anchises’ son. No god drowned me at sea.*
The helm, my posting, violently swung from me
350 as I held it tight and planned our course. I fell
and dragged it with me. I swear by the harsh seas:
196

I feared less for me than for your ship.
Her tiller gone, her helmsman overboard,
would she founder in the rising waves?
For three winter nights the fierce south wind drove me
through the endless sea. On the fourth dawn,
I could just sight Italy from a high wave’s
crest. I was closing on the shore, almost
safe, but as I grabbed rough cliff-holds, weighed down
360 by wet clothes, a cruel tribe set on me
with knives, thinking me a prize, the fools.
Winds and waves now roll me by the shore.
I beg you by the lovely light of sky, the air,
by your father, and your hopes for young Iülus,
save me from this hell, since you’ve overcome it,
and throw soil on my corpse if you reach Velia.
Or if you have a way, if your goddess mother
shows you one (you couldn’t ford this stream
and Styx’s swamp without divine assistance),
370 take my poor hand, take me on board with you,
so that at least in death I’ll find a place of rest.”
So he begged, but the priestess countered:
“Palinurus, why this dread desire to see
the Stygian waters and the Furies’ cruel streams,
to approach the bank unburied and uncalled?
As if the gods’ fates could be bent by prayer.
But take my words as comfort for your pain:
moved by divine omens, nearby folk
from cities far and wide will appease your shade.
380 They’ll raise a tomb for you and pay due offerings.
That spot will always be called Palinurus.”
His cares were lifted at these words, his sorrow
197

banished for a while. The name brought him joy.
And so they went on, heading for the river.
But from his stream the boatman saw them coming
from the silent grove and turning to the bank.
He was quick to shout out a rebuke.
“You two, armed and making for my river:
stop right there and tell me why you’re here.
390 This is a place of shadows, of Sleep and sleepy Night.
Living bodies may not ride my Stygian boat.
I wasn’t pleased to transport Hercules
over the lake, nor Theseus and Pirithoüs—
and they were sons of gods, never defeated.
One wanted to chain Tartarus’s guard-dog.
He dragged him trembling from the king’s own throne!
The other planned to steal our queen from Dis’s bed.”
Apollo’s seer answered in few words:
“We have no such scheme; you needn’t be upset.
400 Our weapons don’t bring violence. Your guard can scare
the bloodless shades with barks for all eternity,
the bride can chastely stay inside her uncle’s home.
Aeneas of Troy, famed for piety and martial
skill, visits his father in the depths of Hell.
If this model of great piety means nothing,
at least you know this branch.” She took it
from her robe, and his swollen heart let go
its rage. No more was said. He marveled at
the sacred gift, the fateful branch displayed
410 after so long, and swung his dark stern to the shore.
Expelling all the souls that sat along the transoms,
he cleared the gangway. Then he boarded huge
198

Aeneas in his stitched-skin boat. It groaned
under the weight; marsh-water flooded in.
At last he set them safe across the river, man and
seer, onto the slimy mud and gray-green reeds.
There sprawled giant Cerberus, in a cave
along the bank. He snarled at them from all three throats.
When the priestess saw his snaky hackles rise,
420 she tossed him a gob of honey and drugged grain
to make him sleep. Three starving throats sprang open,
greedy to snatch the morsel. Then his massive bulk
slumped to the ground, spanning the whole cave.
Now that the guard was sunk in sleep, Aeneas entered,
quick to leave the stream no man could ford again.

At once he could hear voices: the loud wails
and weeping souls of babies cheated of sweet life.
At the start, a black day tore them from their
mothers’ milk and buried them in bitter death.
430 Next were those wrongly condemned to die.
Jurors drawn by lot decided where they’d go.
Minos was the magistrate. He shook the urn
and called a council of the dead to judge the crimes.
Next were the despondent suicides.
Though innocent, they threw their lives away,
sick of the light of day. How gladly now they’d welcome
pain and poverty, just to breathe the air!
But divine law forbids it. The gloomy waves and
hateful swamp confine them, and the nine coils of
199

440 the Styx. Close by, he was shown the Fields of Mourning,

as they’re called. They stretched in all directions.
Here were those whom heartless love consumed
with cruel pining. Secret paths and myrtle trees
concealed them and their passion lived past death.
He saw Phaedra, Procris, and Eriphyle,
sadly showing stabs her cruel son inflicted,
Pasiphae, Laodamia, and Evadne.
With them was Caeneus, once transformed into a man,
then given back her former shape by fate.
450 In this great wood, Phoenician Dido, her wound
still fresh, wandered with them. When the Trojan
hero neared and saw her misty shape among the ghosts
—as when one sees, or thinks one sees, a new moon
climbing through the clouds when the month is young
—he spoke to her in tears with tender love:
“Unhappy Dido, so the news I heard was true?
You’re dead, a suicide by the sword? But—
did I cause your death?* I call the stars and gods
to witness: if the Underworld allows the truth,
460 I left your shores against my will, O Queen.*
The orders of the gods, which force me now
to walk through shades and squalor in deep night,
forced me those days too. How could I think
I’d cause you so much pain by my departure?
Stop, don’t rush from my sight. Who is it
you run from? Fate gives us a final chance to speak.”
With these words he tried to soothe the raging soul
that looked at him so fiercely. His tears fell.
But Dido turned away, her eyes fixed on the ground,
470 her face just as unaltered by his speech
200

as hard flint or a rocky crag of marble.
At last she broke away hate-filled, and hurried
to the shaded forest where Sychaeus, her first
husband, shared her pain and matched her love.
Aeneas was shaken by her unjust death. His eyes
followed her with tears and pity as she left.*
He struggled on his given path. And now they reached
the farthest fields, set aside for heroes in war.
Tydeus met them with Parthenopaeus,
480 great in battle, and the shade of pale Adrastus.
Also Trojans who fell fighting, lamented
to the skies. He groaned to see the crowded ranks:
Thersilochus, Glaucus, Medon, Antenor’s
three sons, Polyboetes, priest of Ceres,
and Idaeus with his chariot and armor.
The souls thronged round him to the left and right.
To see him was too little: they wanted to linger,
to walk with him and learn why he had come.
But the Greek chiefs and Agamemnon’s army
490 shook in fear when they saw the hero’s weapons
gleaming in the gloom. Some turned round to run,
just as they once scuttled to their ships. Others
raised a weak war-cry that mocked their gaping jaws.

And now he saw Deiphobus, Priam’s son,
his whole body mangled, his face and both his hands
with cruel gashes, ears ripped from his ruined head,
his nose slashed to the nostrils—a shameful injury.
201

Aeneas hardly knew the trembling shade that tried
to hide its ghastly wounds, and questioned his old friend:
500 “Great warrior of Teucer’s noble blood,
who chose to punish you so viciously? Who took
such liberties? On that final night, I heard,
you fell onto a heap of mingled corpses,
exhausted from your massacre of Greeks.
I raised your empty tomb on Rhoeteum’s shore,
and loudly called your shade three times. Your name
and armor mark the place, but I never found you,
friend, to bury you before I left our country.”
“Friend, you left nothing undone,” said Priam’s son.
510 “You paid the honors due Deiphobus’s ghost.
My fate and Spartan Helen’s heinous crime threw me
in this hell; she left me these souvenirs.
You know we filled that final night with foolish
revelry. You must recall it all too well.
When the deadly horse pregnant with infantry
entered our citadel, Helen faked a Bacchic
frenzy and launched the shrieking Trojan women
into dance. Then she raised a giant torch
to signal to the Greeks from our acropolis.
520 I was in my luckless marriage-bed, worn out
with worry, lost in sleep. A deep, sweet rest
was pressing on me like the peace of death.
My darling wife removed the weapons from our house
and stole the trusted sword under my head.
She flung the entrance open and called in Menelaus,
no doubt hoping this great favor to her lover
would erase the infamy of her old sins.
What’s left to say? He burst in with Ulysses,
202

the father of all crime. O gods, pay back the Greeks
530 in kind, if I ask for vengeance justly!
But tell me now what brought you here alive.
Did you steer off course as you were sailing?
Is this some god’s command? What fate hounds you so,
that you’d approach this place of murk and misery?”
Meanwhile, Aurora in her rosy chariot
had crossed the summit of the sky, and perhaps
they’d have used up all their time in talk,
but the Sibyl, his companion, warned him curtly:
“Night falls fast, Aeneas. We waste our hours weeping.
540 Here the path splits into two. On the right,
the route leads past the walls of mighty Dis, our way
to Elysium. The left path sends the wicked
to their punishment in godless Tartarus.”
Deiphobus replied: “Don’t rage at me, great priestess.
I’ll return and take my place among the dead.
Go on, glory of our land. Be luckier
than me.” So he spoke, turning away.
Aeneas stole a quick glance back. To the left,
under a cliff, was a massive fortress ringed with
550 triple walls and a raging moat of fire:
Phlegethon, hurling thunderous rocks.
In front, a giant gate and adamantine pillars.
No human force, not even warring gods,
could rip them out. An iron tower reached the sky.
There Tisiphone crouched wakefully, her bloody cloak
hitched high. She watched the entrance day and night.
You could hear groans and savage lash-strokes,
203

irons clanking, chains being dragged. Terrified,
Aeneas stopped to listen to the clamor.
560 “Virgin, what were their crimes? What tortures are
inflicted here? Why does this wailing fill the air?”
The seer began: “Famed leader of the Trojans,
no good souls may cross this evil threshold.
When Hecate assigned Avernus’ woods to me,
she taught me all the ways gods punish men.
Cretan Rhadamanthus rules these cruel realms.
He hears and rebukes deceit, making men
confess the secret crimes they relished when alive,
the guilt they pointlessly delayed till death’s late hour.
570 Vengeful Tisiphone, carrying her whip,
at once leaps down to flay the guilty. She thrusts
her vicious snakes at them, calling on her cruel
sisters. Finally the awful gate swings open
with the screech of grating hinges. Do you see
her awful lurking shape guarding the entrance?
More savage still is what’s inside: massive Hydra,
her fifty black mouths gaping. Then Tartarus itself
plunges to a sheer abyss, a fall to darkness
twice as far as when we gaze at high Olympus.
580 The Titans are there, an ancient race of Earth
struck down by lightning. They grovel in the dregs of Hell.
I also saw Aloeus’ twins, giant bulks
who tried to tear down heaven with their hands
and dislodge Jupiter from his high realm.
I saw Salmoneus paying a cruel price
for mimicking Jove’s lightning and Olympian thunder.
He rode in triumph through Greek cities and
his home town, Elis, brandishing a torch, taking
204

for himself the honor due the gods, the fool,
590 faking the impossible—storms and lightning—
with bronze cymbals and the beat of hooves.
The mighty father flung his fire-bolt through
the heavy clouds—he didn’t need the smoky light
of sputtering torches—and hurled him straight to Hell.
Tityus was here, foster-son of Earth,
his body sprawling through nine acres. A filthy
vulture digs into his deathless liver (always
ripe for torture) with its curving beak,
foraging for dinner, at home deep in
600 his guts. The reborn organ gets no rest.
Should I mention Lapiths, Pirithoüs, and
Ixion? A black cliff looms over them,
on the verge of falling. Golden legs gleam on
their couches and a feast of royal opulence
is spread: but the leader of the Furies sits
right there, forbidding them to reach for food,
always leaping up, raising her torch, and shrieking.
All those who loathed their brothers during life,
who beat their parents or caught clients in a web
610 of fraud, or sat on gold they’d just acquired, putting
no part aside for family (the biggest group),
or were murdered in adultery, or fought
in civil wars, or broke faith with their masters—
locked up, they wait for punishment. Don’t ask
what punishment. There’s no one form or fate.
Some heave along huge boulders, or lie outspread
on wheel-spokes. Doomed Theseus will sit forever
in a chair, and Phlegyas, who suffers most,
205

chides all of them and cries among the shades:
620 ‘Be warned, learn justice, do not scorn the gods.’
This one sold his country and let a tyrant
rule it. This one made and remade laws for money.
Incest drove one to his daughter’s bed.
All dared monstrous crimes—successfully.
A hundred tongues and mouths, an iron voice,
wouldn’t let me cover the varieties
of evil, nor all the names for punishments.”
This said, Phoebus’ aged priestess told him: “Come,
return now to the road; end the task you started.
630 We must hurry. I can see the ramparts built
by Cyclopian forges and the arching gateway.
Our orders were to set the gift down here.”
They went along the dark path side by side,
crossed the open ground, and reached the doors.
Aeneas entered first. He sprinkled himself with fresh
water, then set the branch at Proserpina’s threshold.
They were done, the goddess’ gift delivered.
The fields of joy were next, the sweet green groves
held by the fortunate, homes of the blessed.
640 The fields were bathed in dazzling light by skies
wider than ours, and a different sun and stars.
Some exercised in grassy rings, or fought
mock battles, grappling on the golden sand.
Others stamped their feet in dance, singing songs.
The Thracian seer was there in his trailing robe.
He played his lyre’s seven strings in rhythm,
plucking notes with fingers or an ivory pick.
206

Teucer’s ancient race was there, his handsome sons,
great-souled heroes born in better years: Ilus,
650 Assaracus, and Troy’s founder, Dardanus.
Aeneas marveled at their phantom chariots
and armor, the spears fixed in the earth, the horses
freely grazing far and wide. The men’s love
of chariots and armor, of feeding their sleek
stallions, lasted after death. He saw
others to the right and left, feasting
in the meadows, singing glad odes in groves
fragrant with laurel, where the great stream Eridanus
surfaces to flow among the trees.
660 Here were legions wounded fighting for their
country, priests who’d led pure lives, pious
poets with songs worthy of Apollo,
men who bettered life by new inventions,
and those whose merit set them down in memory.
All their brows were bound with snow-white ribbons.
As they thronged around, the Sibyl spoke to them,
Musaeus first (he was in the center
of the crowd, tallest by a head). She asked:
“Tell me, happy souls, and you, best among poets,
670 what land, what place holds Anchises? It’s for
his sake we’ve come, fording mighty Erebus.”
The hero answered briefly: “No one’s home
is set. We live in shady groves, or by
the river-banks’ soft bends or meadows sweet
with streams. But if this is what you want, you must
climb this ridge. I’ll show you an easy path.”
He walked ahead, pointing out the shining fields
below. The other two descended from the heights.
207

Deep in that lush valley, Father Anchises
680 made a careful count of gathered souls
as they waited for the light above. He happened
to be tallying his family, his dear
grandsons’ fates and fortunes, natures and great deeds.
When he saw Aeneas coming to him through
the meadow, he stretched out both arms eagerly.
Tears ran down his face and he exclaimed:
“You’ve come at last? I knew your piety
would overcome the dangers of the trip. Do I
see your face, my child, and hear that voice I know?
690 I expected this would happen, I counted
down the days. My worry’s been rewarded.
You’ve come so far by land and sea to visit me,
dear son, and you’ve suffered so much hardship.
How I feared that you’d be harmed in Libya!”
He answered: “Father, your sad ghost, visiting
so often, made me cross this boundary.
Our fleet waits on the Tuscan sea. Let me clasp
your hand, don’t pull back from my embrace.”
Tears soaked Aeneas’ face. Three times he tried
700 to wrap his arms around his father’s neck; three times
his hands passed through the insubstantial shade, as if
it were the merest breeze, a fleeting dream.
And now Aeneas saw, at the valley’s end,
a sheltered wood with rustling branches, and
the river Lethe flowing through this peaceful place.
The souls of countless peoples flitted here,
the way bees haunt a meadow’s many-colored flowers
208

in the still of summer, circling round bright
lilies as the whole field buzzes with their hum.
710 This sudden sight startled Aeneas. He asked
for explanation: “What is that far-off river?
Who are the many men who throng its banks?”
Anchises said: “These are the souls to whom
fate owes new bodies. They drink from Lethe’s stream:
it offers peace and long oblivion. I’ve yearned
so long to show and tell you of them face to
face, this gathering of my family, so that
you’d be still happier at finding Italy.”
“But father, must we think that some souls pass from here
720 to life above, taking up the weight of flesh
again? Why this awful longing for the light?”
“I’ll tell you, son,” Anchises said. “You won’t remain
confused.” And he explained each thing in order.
“First: the sky and land and liquid fields of sea,
the silvery sphere of moon, and Titan the sun—
Spirit nurtures them within, and Mind’s infused
throughout, animating mass and mixing with it.
From here comes the race of men and beasts, the lives
of birds, the monsters under Ocean’s marble surface.
730 These seeds have a fiery vigor, and their source
is heavenly. But harmful matter slows them down,
and they’re blunted by our bodies, which must die.
So men fear and want, grieve and feel glad.
Locked in this dark dungeon, they can’t perceive the sky.
Poor things, even when life leaves them on the day
of death, not every sin or canker of the flesh
fully recedes. Many habits harden
209

over time, and in this way become ingrained.
So they pay for former crimes by torment:
740 exposed to hollow winds by crucifixion,
washed clean of infection in a whirling flood,
or cauterized by fire—we all suffer our soul’s
cure. Then we’re sent to wide Elysium.
A few of us stay in this happy place
until long years have purged the final taint of matter
and time’s great wheel has come full circle: only
ether’s spirit, the fire of pure air, remains.
When the rest have cycled through a thousand years,
the god calls them in clusters to the river Lethe:*
750 These forgetful spirits hope for resurrection
into bodies. They start to want to see the sky.”
Falling quiet, Anchises drew his son and Sibyl
to the center of the bustling crowd.
From a hill, he studied the men marching by
and knew their faces in the long procession.
“Come,” he said, “I’ll reveal the future glory
of our Trojan lineage, and the Italians
who wait for us, splendid souls who’ll take our name.*
I’ll teach you your destiny. Do you see
760 the young man leaning on the headless spear?
By lot, he’ll be the next to reach the light
above, his blood mingled with Italy’s:
Silvius, an Alban name, your last-born son.
Lavinia, your wife, will bear him in a forest
when you’re elderly: a king, to other kings
a father. Through him our race will rule in Alba Longa.*
210

Next is famous Procas, glory of the Trojan
race. Then Capys, Numitor, and your namesake
Silvius Aeneas, your match in piety
770 and weapons—if he can take up Alba’s throne.
What young men!—see the great strength that they show,
the civic crowns of oak leaves on their heads!
They’ll found Nomentum, Gabiï, Fidena;
they’ll set Collatia’s fortress on the hills.
Pometiï, Castrum Inuï, Bola, and
Cora will be names, now just nameless lands.
Mars’ son Romulus will join his grandfather
on earth, Trojan through his mother, Ilia.
Do you see his helmet’s double crests?
780 His father honored him with his own emblem.
Under his rule, shining Rome will spread
her empire through the world, her spirit to Olympus,
and set a single wall around her seven hills.
She’ll be rich in sons—like tower-crowned Cybele,
riding in her chariot through Phrygian towns,
happy in the gods she bore, a hundred grandsons
in her arms, all divine, all heaven-dwellers.
Now turn your eyes, look at this race, your Romans.
Here is Caesar, with all of Iülus’ children
790 who’ll come under the sky’s great axis. And here:
the man you hear so often promised to you,
Augustus Caesar, born of gods, who’ll bring
a golden age to Latium,* where Saturn lived,
and push his empire past the Garamants
and Indians to lands beyond our stars,
beyond Sun’s yearly path, where Atlas hoists the sky,
turning the star-studded sphere on his shoulder.
211

Even Caspian lands and the Black Sea dread his
approach; they already fear the prophecies.
800 The seven deltas of the Nile tremble in terror.
Hercules himself did not cross so much land,
although he shot the bronze-hoofed deer, brought peace
to Erymanthus’ woods, and scared the Lerna with
his bow; nor triumphant Bacchus, using vines
to steer his team of tigers as he drives down Nysa’s
summit. Will we hesitate to put our courage
to the test? Does fear keep us from our home
in Italy? Who’s that far off, distinct with his
olive crown and offerings? I see the gray beard
810 of King Numa, called from humble Cures
and its pauper fields to power. He’ll impose
the rule of law. Next is Tullus, who will
shatter the land’s peace and push into armed
ranks slow men long since unused to triumph.
The boaster Ancus follows him, even now
too taken with the masses’ favor. Do you wish
to see the Tarquin kings, and the proud soul
of Brutus the avenger, who won back the fasces?
He’ll be the first to hold a consul’s power and
820 the cruel axes. For lovely liberty, he’ll kill
his own sons when they stir up revolution,
unhappy man, however later ages tell it.
His love of country won—and his great greed for glory.
Far off you see the Drusi and the Decii,
Torquatus (brutal axman) and Camillus, savior
of the standards. That shining pair in matching armor,
in concord now while darkness presses them:
212

if they ever reach the light of life, ah,
the wars, the slaughter they’ll stir up! The father-in-law
830 swoops down from his Alpine ramparts and
Monoecus’ heights while his son-in law masses
the Eastern enemy! My sons, don’t warm to war,
don’t turn your sword against your country’s heart.
You who trace your blood back to Olympus, stop first,
drop your weapon from your hand, my kin!
This one’s* fame comes from the Greeks he killed at Corinth:
he’ll ride in victory to the lofty Capitol.
That one will destroy Argos, Agamemnon’s
Mycene and Perseus (great Achilles’
840 heir), avenging Troy and Minerva’s looted
temple. Who’d omit great Cato, or you, Cossus?
Or the Gracchi and two Scipios, Libya’s
ruin, thunderbolts of war; Fabricius,
powerful though poor, Serranus sowing furrows?
You Fabii, why hurry? Maximus,
you’ll be the only one to save our land by lagging.
Others, I believe, will beat out bronze* that seems
to breathe and chisel living faces out of marble.
They’ll excel in pleading lawsuits, and they’ll trace
850 the heavens’ paths and chart the rising stars.
You, Roman, remember your own arts:* to rule
the world with law, impose your ways on peace,
grant the conquered clemency, and crush the proud in war.”
They were struck with awe. Anchises added:
“See Claudius Marcellus, marked by splendid spoils?
Victorious, he strides along, the tallest there.
This horseman will steady Roman power
213

in a time of chaos, trample rebel Gaul and
Carthage, and for the third time offer captured arms
860 to Romulus.” Aeneas saw a handsome young man
near Marcellus, in bright armor, but his face
showed little joy, and his eyes were downcast.
He asked Anchises: “Who is that who goes with him?
A son? A son’s son from this noble stock?
How his comrades cheer! What a fine impression!
But black night flaps around his head with her grim shadow.”
Then tears welled in Anchises’ eyes. “My child,
don’t ask about the great grief of your people.
The fates will offer us the merest glimpse of him;
870 they won’t let him live long. Would the Romans seem
too powerful to you, O gods, if he were ours?
What mighty groans of men the Field of Mars
will send to our great city! What a funeral
you’ll see, Tiber, as you pass his tomb’s fresh soil!
No other Trojan boy will so exalt the hopes
of his Latin forefathers, nor will the land
of Romulus ever boast his like again—
his piety, old-time honor, and unconquered
strength. He’d have had no equal in a fight,
880 no matter if he met the enemy on foot
or horse, spurring on his stallion’s sweaty flanks.
Unhappy boy, if you can change your cruel fate,
you’ll be a true Marcellus. Fill my arms with lilies;
I’ll scatter these bright flowers for your soul,
my kin—just poor offerings and an empty
rite.” So they passed through the whole region
in the misty air, and surveyed it all.
Anchises led his son through every sight
214

and fired his spirit with a love of future glory.
890 Then he told him of the wars he’d have to fight
and spoke of the Laurentians and Latinus’
town, the hardships to avoid, those to endure.
There are twin Gates of Sleep.* One, they say, is made
of horn, and lets true visions pass through easily.
The other gleams with complex work in ivory,
but through it shades send lying visions to the light.
Anchises and the Sibyl brought Aeneas
to this gate and sent him through. He hurried
to the ships and joined his crew. They sailed
900 along the coastline to Caieta’s harbor
and cast anchor. The sterns rested on the shore.

215

BOOK 7

ITALY—AND WAR

Caieta, once Aeneas’ nurse, you died here too.*
The city named for you now has eternal fame.
This honor marks your bones and resting place
in great Hesperia—if that is any glory.
After her burial rites, when the grave-mound had been
raised, pious Aeneas waited for calm seas,
then made his way from port under full sail.
The breezes blew past sundown and the shining moon
lit up their path; the ocean gleamed with shivery light.
10 First they grazed the shores of Circe, the Sun’s
wealthy daughter. Around her, dangerous groves
resounded with her singing. In her lofty halls
she kindled cedar to dispel the dark, and wove
a whirring shuttle through her loom’s fine warp.
From here they faintly heard the angry growls
of lions yanking at their chains and roaring late at night,
and bristly boars and bears raging in pens, and huge
howling shapes of wolves—human once, but
altered from their form by the cruel goddess’s
20 magic herbs. They wore the face and fur of beasts.
To spare the pious Trojans from the horrors
of this port and hateful shore, Neptune
216

filled their sails with helping winds and pushed
their ships to safety past the foaming shoals.

The sea began to blush with sun, and saffron Dawn
high in her rosy chariot shone bright.
Suddenly the winds died down and every gust
was still. The oars pulled slowly in the marble sea.
Then Aeneas, on his ship, saw a lengthy
30 stretch of woodland. At that spot, the lovely Tiber,
yellow with thick sand and churning eddies,
burst into the sea. All around, the varied
birds for whom the banks and stream were home
caressed the sky with song and flew among the trees.
He told his crew to point the prows to land.
Happily, they sailed into the shaded stream.
Come, Erato!* I’ll unfold the kings, the times,
the state of ancient Latium when foreign troops
first landed on Italian shores; I’ll call
40 to memory the incidents that started war.
Goddess, guide your poet. I’ll tell of brutal clashes,
battle lines, courage that sent kings to death,
Etruscan warriors, and all of Italy
in arms. A greater series of events begins,
a greater task for me.
Elderly King Latinus
ruled these fields and quiet cities in long peace.*
They say that Faunus fathered him on Marica,
a Laurentian nymph. Faunus’ father, Picus,
217

traced his blood to Saturn, founder of the race.
50 By the gods’ decree, Latinus had no sons;
one was lost to him in childhood. A single
daughter tended that great house—now of age
and ready for a husband. Many from wide
Latium and Italy were wooing her.
Turnus was the handsomest of all, and
of noble ancestry. The royal queen was keen
to make him son-in-law (her love for him was striking).
But sacred omens blocked this with a string of horrors.
A laurel tree with holy leaves stood in the royal
60 home’s inner court, revered for many years.
They say father Latinus found this tree
when he built the citadel. He made it sacred
to Apollo, and named his folk Laurentians.
Now a swarm of bees (amazing!) occupied
its crown, sailing through the clear air
with a mighty buzz. They wove their feet and formed
an instant beehive hanging from a leafy branch.
At once the seer pronounced: “I see a foreign man
arriving with an army—his path, his goal
70 are like the bees’; he plans to take our heights!”
Then, when chaste Lavinia lit the altar
with a sacred torch, standing by her father,
they saw her long hair catch on fire—horrible!
Her headdress crackled as flames scorched it;
the tiara, bright with many gems, blazed up.
She herself, engulfed in smoke and orange
light, scattered sparks through all the house.
This was felt to be miraculous and awful:
seers foresaw that she’d be famed in life
218

80 and legend, but bring great conflict to her people.

The king, worried by these omens, visited
the oracle of Faunus, his prophetic father,
in great Albunea’s grove, which echoes
with a sacred spring; the air is foul
and dark. Here the Italians and all
Oenotria seek guidance when in doubt. Once a
seer has given gifts, he lies in the silent night
on pelts of sheep he’s killed, waiting for dreams,
and sees an eerie host of phantoms flit around
90 with varied voices. He has the right to speak
with gods; he talks to Acheron in deep Avernus.
Here Latinus, likewise seeking answers,
sacrificed a hundred woolly sheep.
He spread their pelts and lay on them to rest.
A sudden voice spoke out from the deep grove:
“Don’t wed your daughter to the Latins, son,
don’t trust the marriage that’s already planned.
Foreigners will come to be your sons-in-law.
They’ll raise our name up to the stars by blood.*
100 Their sons will see the world under their feet.
They’ll rule as far as both the seas seen by the circling
sun.” Latinus didn’t hide what Faunus said,
the warning given in the silent night.
When the men from Troy tied fast their fleet
to the river’s grassy bank, flitting Rumor
had already spread it through Italian towns.
Aeneas, handsome Iülus and the leading princes
sprawled under a tree’s high branches to prepare
219

their meal. They set flatbreads on the grass
110 as plates for food (so Jupiter himself advised)
and added woodland fruits to these spelt disks.
By chance, when everything was eaten, hunger
made them gnaw the thin round crusts, and break
with daring hands and mouths the disks of fateful
bread, quartered sections one and all.
“See, we eat our tables, too!” said Iülus—
only that, a joke. But this comment
marked the end of hardship. Stunned, Aeneas
seized on Iülus’ words and hushed his son.
120 He spoke at once: “I greet you, country owed to me
by fate, and you, the faithful gods of Trojan hearths.
This is our home, your native land. My father
(I remember!) left me with this fateful secret:*
‘When you come to unknown shores, my son,
and hunger makes you eat your tables, then,
despite exhaustion, know you’re home. Set your buildings
here first, and heap ramparts around them.’
This was that same hunger, this was the last
trial we had to face, an end to exile.
130 At sun’s first light let’s happily explore
this land, and learn who lives in it, and where
they’ve set their towns. We’ll branch out from the port.
Now honor Jove with offerings, pray to Father
Anchises, and refresh the altars’ wine.”
He wound a leafy sprig around his head,
calling on the local guardian spirit, Earth,
the first of gods, nymphs and unknown streams,
then Night, its rising constellations, Ida’s Jove,
220

and the Phrygian Mother, all in order,
140 then his parents, one in heaven, one in Hades.
The mighty Father thundered three times loudly
in the clear sky, and flourished in his hand
a cloud that blazed with golden rays from high above.
At once rumor swept the Trojan ranks:
the time had come to build the fated walls!
Quickly they renewed the feast, setting up
and garlanding the wine, glad at the great omen.
At the start of day, when Titan’s torch lit up
the land, they scattered to spy out the towns,
150 the coast and country. Here was Numicus’ lake,
here the river Tiber, here lived strong Latins.
Aeneas picked a hundred envoys of all ranks
and sent them to Latinus’ lordly home,
decked with branches from Athena’s olive tree
and taking presents for the king, to ask for peace.
No delay: they rushed off at a rapid pace.
Meanwhile he traced future walls with shallow trenches
on the shore, building his first town, circling
it with parapets and ramparts, like a camp.
160 When the envoys came, they saw the Latins’ towers
and high homes, and passed under the city gate.
Outside the walls, boys and young men in their prime
trained horses in the dust, tamed teams for chariots,
pulled bows taut or hurled vibrating lances,
challenging each other to boxing or a race.
One rode ahead to tell the aged king: imposing
men in foreign clothes had come to Latium.
Latinus had them called inside the palace
221

and took his seat on his ancestral throne.
170 On the city peak, Laurentian Picus’ palace

rose up huge and hallowed on a hundred columns,
a site eerie with woods and ancient rituals.
Auspicious kings received their scepters and the rods
of office here. Their senate-house and sacred feasts
were here, and here, at lengthy tables, the elders
sat to eat after they’d sacrificed a ram.
Statues of the ancestors stood in a row
inside the vestibule, hewn of ancient cedar:
Italus, the vine-grower Sabinus
180 with his curving scythe, ancient Saturn
and the bust of two-faced Janus, other early
kings, and those wounded fighting for their country.
Many weapons too hung on the sacred doorposts:
captured chariots and curving ax-blades, crests of
helmets, giant bolts from city gates, spears and
shields, bronze prows torn from ships. Picus himself,
the horse-tamer, sat there with an augur’s staff,
his tunic edged in purple, a sacred shield
in his left hand. His lover Circe, lost to lust,
190 used her golden wand and drugs to change him
to a bird, and sprinkled colors on his wings.*
In this holy temple, on his ancestral throne,
Latinus called the Teucrians inside.
When they came, he said to them serenely:
“Speak, Dardanians. We know your city
and your race, we’d heard that you were sailing here.
Why? What cause, what need carried your ships
222

to Italy through spans of dark blue sea?
Perhaps you lost your way or storms blew you
200 off course—sailors often meet with such bad luck.
You’ve traveled up our stream, you dock at our harbor.
Don’t reject our welcome. The Latins are the race
of Saturn; no chains or laws compel us to be just,
only free will—we keep our old god’s ways.
I recall (the story dims with passing years)
how old Auruncans claimed that Dardanus, born
in these fields, later left for Phrygian Ida’s
towns and Thracian Samos—now it’s Samothrace.
He sailed from here, his Tuscan home of Corythus.
210 These days his throne is in the starry sky’s gold
court. His altars add to the gods’ numbers.”
Ilioneus answered him: “My king,
distinguished son of Faunus, no dark storms
or torrents forced us to your land, nor did
stars and coastlines lead us off our course.
We came on purpose to this city, willingly,
driven from our kingdom—once the greatest
the sun saw as he came from high Olympus.
Our race goes back to Jupiter: we men
220 rejoice in this. Our king has Jove’s great blood:
Aeneas of Troy, who sent us to your shores.
The fierce storm the vicious Greeks unleashed on Ida’s
fields, how Fortune made the worlds of Asia
and Europe clash in war—this everyone has heard,
even those who hold the farthest lands cut off
by Ocean’s tides, even those beyond the zone
of scorching sun, the middle of the earth’s five tracts.
223

We sailed from that cataclysm across many
seas. We beg a small home for our native gods,
230 a harmless stretch of shore, with air and water.
We won’t disgrace your kingdom. Your fame and our
gratitude for such a gift will never fade.
Italy will not regret she welcomed Trojans.
I swear this on Aeneas’ life and strong right hand,
by which pacts were made and battles fought:
many tribes and nations sought us for themselves*
and hoped to make us allies. Don’t scorn us if we come
with olive sprigs and words of supplication.
The gods’ fate made us seek your land. Dardanus
240 began here, and here Dardanians return.
Apollo sends us urgent orders: ‘Come back
to Tuscan Tiber and Numicus’ sacred pools.’
Our leader also brings small tokens of our former
glory, relics saved from burning Troy. With this
gold cup, Anchises poured libations at the altar,
and this was Priam’s finery when he judged
the nations: a sacred scepter and a diadem,*
and robes that Trojan women toiled to weave.”
Latinus fixed his gaze upon the ground.
250 His face was still, but his eyes moved in thought.
The clothing stitched in purple didn’t move him,
nor did Priam’s scepter. His daughter’s marriage
was a far greater concern. He reflected
on the oracle of ancient Faunus.
Was this the man foretold by fate, who’d come
from foreign lands to be his son-in-law, to share
his power equally? Would this race excel
in bravery and overcome the world by force?
224

He spoke at last with joy: “May the gods support
260 our plan and their prophecy! You’ll get your wish,
Trojan. I don’t spurn your gifts. While I rule,
you won’t lack for fertile land or miss Troy’s wealth.
Just let Aeneas come himself, if he so much
wants to be my guest-friend and my ally:
he shouldn’t fear kindly faces. My condition
for this pact will be to clasp his hand in mine.
You then take this message to your king.
I have a daughter, but my father’s shrine
and many omens warn me not to marry her
270 to one of us. It’s said my son-in-law will come
from overseas to Latium, that our blood
will lift our name up to the stars. I think
the fates demand your king—and if I’m right,
I’m ready.” Latinus picked out horses from his
stables, whose high stalls held three hundred. He sent them
to the Trojans right away: stallions
with saddlecloths of purple thread. Golden
neck-chains dangled from their chests, their coverings
were gold, and their teeth champed on gold bridles.
280 He sent a chariot for absent Aeneas
and a horse-team of celestial stock, their nostrils
snorting fire. They came from crossbreeds bred by clever
Circe, who’d mated stallions stolen from her father
with mortal mares. Aeneas’ men returned on them
with Latinus’ gifts and words, and news of peace.
Cruel Juno was just coming back from Argos,
Inachus’ town, in her airborne chariot.
Far off, from the skies of Sicily, she saw
225

glad Aeneas and the Trojan fleet. She saw
290 their houses rising, sailors trusting to the land,
the ships unmanned. Stopping short, pierced with pain,
she shook her head and poured out heartfelt words:
“Oh no! That hated race, those Phrygian fates opposed
to mine! Why didn’t they perish on Sigeum’s fields?
Why won’t these losers lose? Why didn’t they burn
in burning Troy? So they’ve found a way
through war and conflagration? Is my power spent,
or my loathing satisfied? These fugitives—
I hated them and dared to hunt them through the waves,
300 I fought these exiles across every ocean.
The strength of sea and sky was used up on these men!
What use was Scylla, or the Syrtes, or awful
Charybdis? Now the Trojans settle by the longed-for
Tiber, safe from sea—and me. Mars could
kill off all the giant Lapiths; the gods’ father
gave up ancient Calydon to soothe
Diana’s rage; undeserving victims both.*
But I, Jove’s mighty wife, who dared everything
I could, who turned to every tactic: I’m losing
310 to Aeneas. If my powers aren’t enough,
why not stoop to begging anyone? If I
can’t move the gods above, then I’ll move Acheron.*
Granted: I can’t keep him from his Latin kingdom,
I can’t change Lavinia’s destined marriage.
But I can delay crucial events! I can
destroy their nations! Let son-in-law and father
join: the price will be their people. My girl,
your dowry will be blood, Rutulian and Latin.
Bellona waits to be your bridesmaid. Hecuba
226

320 won’t be the only woman to give birth

to wedding flames. Venus’ son will be the same,
a second Paris, a fatal torch for this new Troy!”
She’s done. The dreadful goddess makes for land.
She rousts the grief-bringer Allecto from the Furies’
lair in Hell’s dark murk, she who relishes
grim wars and rage and treachery and evil crimes.
Even her father, Pluto, and her hellish sisters
hate this monster—so many are her awful forms
and faces, so many black snakes swarm on her.
330 Juno goads her with these words: “Virgin
born of Night: take on this task, a favor just for
me. Save my name and honor from disgrace
and ruin. Don’t allow Aeneas’ men to sway
Latinus with a marriage, and seize Italy.
You cause loving brothers to seize swords, you wreck
families with feuds, and visit whips and death
on homes. You have a thousand names and ways of harm.
Look into your box of tricks, undo the pact
of peace, and sow the crimes of war. Let men
340 want swords, seek them, seize them, instantly!”
Allecto, steeped in serpent venom, swooped at once
to the Laurentian ruler’s halls in Latium
and stalked Amata’s silent door. The queen
was seething with a woman’s angst and anger:
Trojans had arrived—was Turnus’ marriage safe?
Now Allecto flung a snake from her black hair.
It pierced Amata, then plunged deep into her heart
to derange her into ruining her own home.
227

With viperish breath it slid between her clothing and
350 smooth breasts, too subtle to be felt in her mad state.
The giant snake became a golden chain
around her throat, then melded with her headband.
Unobserved, it wove into her hair and slunk
across her frame. At first, while the poison just
attacked her senses, winding fire round her bones,
before she felt the full flame in her heart,
she still spoke gently, like a mother, shedding
tears for her daughter and the Phrygian wedding:
“Will you give Lavinia to these Trojan exiles?
360 Don’t you pity her, or yourself, her father?
Or me? Whom that lying pirate will abandon
at first breeze, departing with his stolen bride!
This is how that Trojan shepherd came to Sparta
and stole Leda’s daughter Helen off to Troy!
What about your oath, your old love for your people,
the pledge you gave so often to my nephew Turnus?
If her husband must be foreign to the Latins,
and father Faunus’ orders bind you, I say
every land is ‘outside’ if our kingdom doesn’t
370 rule it: that’s what the gods meant. Turnus too,
if you trace his people’s origin, is from
Acrisius and Inachus: a Mycenean.”
But when she saw that he opposed her and
her words were wasted, and when the Fury’s poison
penetrated to her bones, pervading her,
then poor Amata, goaded by the monster,
rampaged in a shameless frenzy through the city.
Like a spinning top that whirls under the whip,
228

when little boys, intent on play, lash it round
380 an empty yard in circles; the childish band
is captivated by its curving path,
and wonders at the spinning boxwood toy
given life by blows: just so, Amata whirled
across the city and its warlike people.
She faked a Bacchic trance and flew into the forest.
Committing worse crimes as her madness
grew, she hid her daughter in the leafy hills
to rob the Trojans of their torch-lit wedding,
shrieking “Bacchus, only you deserve her!
390 She holds the pine-topped stalk for you; she honors
you in dance; for you, she tends long hair.”
Rumor flew. Right away the same strong urge
to find new homes drove all the raving mothers.
They left home wearing fawn-skins, their heads bared
to wind,* or filled the air with warbling howls,
holding vine-branches as spears. The queen herself
stood in the center with a burning torch, fevered,
singing wedding hymns for Turnus and her daughter,
her bloodshot eyes darting around. She shouted
400 fiercely: “Latin mothers, hear me, all of you:
if your pious hearts still care for sad Amata,
if you feel anguish for a mother’s rights,
untie your hair and join my Bacchic revelry!”
With Bacchus’ goads Allecto whirled the mad queen
everywhere, through the woods and dens of beasts.
Once she saw she’d honed Amata’s fury well
and ruined Latinus’ plans and family,
at once her dark wings took the awful goddess
229

to daring Turnus’ town. They say that Danaë
410 built it with Greek settlers when the swift South Wind
carried her there. In old times it was called
Ardea, and the name’s still famous, but her peak
is past. Here Turnus was sleeping soundly
under his high roof in dark of night.
Allecto shed her fierce face and Fury’s body,
taking on the look of an old woman.
She lined her ugly brow with wrinkles, added
headbands and white hair, and wove in olive sprigs,
becoming ancient Calybe, priestess of Juno.
420 She stood in front of him and said: “Turnus,
will you let so much effort go to waste
and yield your scepter to the Dardan settlers?
The king denies you marriage and the dowry won
by blood. A foreign heir is chosen for the throne.
Go then, fool, face thankless danger, mow down
Tuscan soldiers, keep the Latins safe.
Almighty Juno ordered me to say this to you
as you rested in the calm of night. Get up,
gladly arm your men and march them out
430 to battle from the gates. Set afire the Phrygian
chiefs and painted ships camped by our lovely stream.
The gods’ great power calls for it. If King Latinus
won’t perform the wedding that he swore to, let him
pay the price and learn what Turnus is in war!”
Scoffing at the priestess, the young man said:
“The news that ships have sailed the Tiber’s stream
has not escaped my ears, as you think:
don’t exaggerate the danger. Nor has Juno
230

lost her love for me. But as for you: old age
440 and cobwebs have the better of you, auntie.
They cause you false concern, tricking a seer
with silly fears and the fights of kings. Your job’s
to guard the statues and the temples of the gods.
Men will manage war and peace. This is their work.”
Hearing this, Allecto blazed up in a rage,
and even as he spoke, a sudden seizure took him.
His eyes bulged in terror: so many serpents hissed
around the awful form he saw. He struggled to say
more, but she turned wild burning eyes on him
450 and shoved him back. Two snakes rose from her hair.
She cracked her whip and said from rabid lips:
“Look! Here I am, bested by old age
and cobwebs, tricked by silly fears and the fights
of kings. I’ve come from my deadly sisters’ home,
and in my hand I bring you war and death.”
She hurled a firebrand at the man. Smoking
with dark light, it sank deep into his chest.
A dreadful fear cut off his drowsiness at once.
Sweat poured down and soaked him to the bone.
460 Crazed, he roared for weapons, looked for them in bed
and in the house. Battle-frenzy boiled in him,
and lust for war, but anger most—like a seething
cauldron sitting over flaming twigs; they crackle
and the liquid dances with the heat, then the froth
rises and the boiling water bubbles over
and spills out; thick vapor rises in the air.
The peace was ruined. Turnus told his chiefs to march
on King Latinus: they should arm themselves,
231

save Italy, expel the enemy: he could
470 handle both the Trojans and the Latins.
He called the gods as witness to his vows.
The Rutulians urged each other on:
Turnus’ handsome youth and strength moved some,
some his royal blood, some his fame in fighting.
While Turnus filled Rutulian hearts with courage,
Allecto’s Stygian wings propelled her to the Trojans
with a new idea. She checked the riverbank
and saw bright Iülus flushing game into his snares.
The Fury cast a sudden frenzy on his dogs.
480 She daubed the well-known scent of deer onto their snouts,
so they’d be hot to hunt. This was the first
cause of conflict, this roused country folk for war.
There was a gorgeous stag with giant antlers
which Tyrrhus and his sons had taken from
its mother’s teats and reared—Tyrrhus, keeper
of the royal herds and the king’s wide fields.
Silvia, their sister, groomed this docile deer
with love. She twined soft garlands around his antlers,
combed his coat and washed him in the clear springs.
490 He let her pat him and ate from the master’s table.
He’d wander through the forest and willingly return,
however late at night, to the door he knew.
This stag was far from home, following the river
down the grassy banks, where the heat was less.
Iülus’ frothing dogs, on the chase, surprised him.
Ascanius himself, on fire to win high praise,
aimed an arrow from his curving bow. Some god
firmed his wobbling hand, and the shaft
232

flew hissing through the deer’s flank and belly.
500 He fled wounded to the safety of his home
and made it to his stall, moaning, bloody,
filling the house with cries as if begging for help.
Sylvia’s the first to beat her arms in grief.
She calls her hardy countrymen to help.
They’re there suddenly (dread Allecto still hid
in those silent woods), one with a charred stake,
one a heavy knotted club. What each man gropes for,
his rage makes a weapon. Tyrrhus by chance
was splitting oaks in four, pounding in the wedges.
510 He calls his troops and grabs his ax, breathing fury.
The cruel goddess sees her chance for sabotage.
She rushes from her lookout to the stable roof
and sounds the shepherd’s signal from on high.
Her bugle blares a hellish sound. At once
the deep woods shudder, echoing the sound.
Diana’s distant lake hears it, and Nar’s river
white with sulfur, and Velinus’ springs.
Scared mothers press their children to their breast.
Rough farmers, quick to answer, seize their swords
520 and run from everywhere toward the frightful
sound. The Trojans likewise break up camp,
pouring out to bring Ascanius support.
Battle lines are drawn. This is not some rustic
brawl with heavy clubs and fire-charred stakes.
They fight with two-edged swords; a black crop
of iron bristles far and wide. Bronze armor
flashes in the sun, its light reflected by
the clouds—like wave-crests whitening when the wind
233

picks up; the ocean rises slowly, the swells build;
530 at last waves tower from the seabed to the sky.
Now a whistling arrow drops a young man
out in front—Almo, Tyrrhus’ oldest son.
The wound lodges in his throat; blood wells up
to choke his breath and bubbling tries at speech.
Many corpses fall around him: old Galaesus
too, as he comes up to plead for peace, most just
of men, richest in Italian pastures; five flocks
of bleating sheep, five herds of cows grazed on
his grounds, a hundred plowshares tilled his land.
540 With both sides matched, the battle rages on the plain.

So Allecto—her promise fulfilled, the war
now steeped in blood, and men already killed
—leaves Italy and whirls airborne to Juno.
She reports, in the proud tone of a victor:
“See my acts: discord and the grief of war.
Now let them be friends or join in treaties!
I’ve splashed the Trojans with Italian blood.
I’ll add this too, if you say you want it:
I’ll spread the war to nearby towns with rumors,
550 and fire their souls with insane lust for war
so they’ll run to help from all around. I’ll sow
the fields with swords.” But Juno says, “Enough
of terror and deceit. The causes of the war
are set. They fight hand to hand, fresh blood wets
the weapons chance provided. Let Venus’ peerless son
and King Latinus celebrate such wedding rites.
The lord of high Olympus does not want you
wandering at will through the breezes of the sky.
234

Leave this place. If there’s further need
560 for action, I’ll take care of it myself.”
Allecto raises wings that hiss with snakes
and leaves the heavens for her home in Cocytus.
In central Italy, at the foot of mountains,
there’s a famous place, spoken of by many:
the valley of Amsanctus. All around, dark forest
rings it with dense leaves. At the center,
a loud torrent spins and tumbles boulders.
There’s an eerie cave with holes for cruel Dis’s
breath to rise; from a massive crater’s reeking
570 jaws, Acheron erupts. Here the Fury
hides her hated power, relieving earth and sky.
Meanwhile Saturn’s daughter adds her final flourish
to the war. All the shepherds from the front
rush into town, bringing back the dead boy
Almo and Galaesus with his mangled face.
They implore the gods and call upon Latinus.
Hearing cries of “Murder!” in the heated crowd,
Turnus feeds their fear: “Trojans are called to rule,
our blood will mix with Phrygian, I’ll be banished!”
580 Those whose mothers gamboled in a Bacchic trance
among the pathless groves, drawn by Amata’s name,
come together from all sides and call for battle.
Through some malign influence, now everyone
demands war’s horrors—against omens, against fate.
They crowd and push around Latinus’ house.
He stands like a rock steadfast against the sea
when crashing breakers come its way, a mass
that doesn’t move as waves smash all around it.
235

The cliffs and foamy reefs roar uselessly;
590 seaweed slams its side and slurps back out to sea.
But the king can’t stop the reckless plan—
it goes as savage Juno wills it, even though
he calls so often on the gods and empty breezes.
“Fate has broken us, a storm sweeps us away,”
he cries. “My poor people, you’ll pay the price
for blood you spill unjustly. Turnus, your crime
will reap harsh punishment; you’ll beg the gods
too late. Now I retire—robbed of a good
death in my old age.” He fences himself
600 in his house and drops the reins of state.
There was a custom in Italian Latium
which Alban towns have since held sacred. Great Rome
observes it when she’s roused to fight and wreak
war’s sorrows on the Getae or Hyrcani
or the Arabs, to march eastward to India
and claim our standards from the Parthians.*
There are twin Gates of War by name, feared
and revered in the cult of cruel Mars.
A hundred brazen bolts and iron’s eternal strength
610 bind them. Their watchman Janus never leaves his post.
When the elders have resolved on war, the consul,
marked out by his Gabine belt and Quirine toga,
unlocks the creaking gates and calls for war.
The men muster; bronze horns blare with hoarse
assent. This is the custom that Latinus
should have observed in raising war against
Aeneas’ men: to open the grim gates.
But the father of his people will not touch them.
236

Rejecting that foul task, he hides himself in shadows.
620 So Juno herself, queen of gods, glides down
and strikes the sluggish portal with her hand.
The hinges turn, the iron Gates of War burst open.
Italy, so calm and steadfast once, is blazing.
Some leave on foot across the fields, some wildly stir up
dust on rearing stallions. All want weapons.
Men rub down their shields and spears with grease,
polish them, and whet axes on grindstones. They’re glad
to hoist the standards, to hear the trumpets blast.
Five great cities set up anvils to forge arms:
630 strong Atina and proud Tibur, Ardea,
Crustumerium, and towered Antemnae.
They hammer hollow helmets and bend willow-stalks
for shields. Some forge breastplates out of bronze
and shining greaves from pliant silver. The honor due to
plow and sickle, all their love of farming—gone.
They recast their fathers’ swords. The trumpets give
the sign, the watchword’s shared. In a rush, one grabs
a helmet from his house, another drives his trembling
horses to the yoke, grabbing his shield and
640 golden three-plied chain mail, his trusty sword.
O Muses, open Helicon’s gates of song for me.
Which kings were roused to war? Which chiefs and armies
filled the fields? What men were raised on Italy’s
rich soil back then, what weapons fed her fire?
You remember, goddesses, and you can tell it.
Only the faintest breath of legend wafts to us.
The first to enter war is harsh Mezentius
237

from Tuscan shores, a despiser of the gods,
and his troops. Lausus, his son, is near, breaker
650 of horses, hunter of beasts. No man is more
handsome, except Laurentian Turnus. Lausus
brings a thousand soldiers with him from Caere—
but in vain. He deserves more than his father’s
orders, and a father not Mezentius.
Next Aventinus, handsome son of handsome
Hercules, parades his palm-decked chariot
and winning team. His shield sports his father’s emblem:
Hydra circled by a hundred snakes. The priestess
Rhea bore him secretly into the realm
660 of light within the woods of Aventine.
She slept with the god Hercules—he’d just
murdered Geryon and reached Laurentian fields,
where he washed his Spanish cows in Tuscan waters.
His men bring spears and savage pikes to war.
They fight with tapered swords and Samnite bayonets.
A giant cape sweeps round their leader, a matted
lion-skin that once was Hercules’s cloak.
The awful mane and ivory teeth rest on his head.
Like this, a horrid sight, he walks into the palace.
670 Next, twin brothers from the town of Tibur

(named for Tiburtus, their other brother):
Catillus and keen Coras, men of Argive origin.
They rush to the front through a sea of weapons,
like two cloud-born Centaurs hurtling down
a mountain peak, leaving Homole and snowy
Othrys at a breakneck pace: the huge forest
238

yields to them, branches buckle and snap loudly.
Praeneste’s founder, Caeculus, is there as well.
Every age has thought him born to Vulcan
680 in a herd of cows, a king discovered
at the hearth. He comes with a rustic legion
drawn from far and wide: men from high Praeneste,
the fields of Juno’s Gabiï, cold Anio, and
Hernican crags dewy with streams; men you nourish,
rich Anagnia, and you too, Amasenus.
Not all have weapons, clanging shields, or chariots.
Most sling pellets of black lead, others hold two
spears in their hands. On their heads they wear
gray wolf-skin caps. Their custom is to march
690 with bare left feet; rawhide boots cover the right.
Messapus the horse-breaker, son of Neptune,
protected by the gods from death by sword or fire,
at once calls to arms his soldiers so long idle,
his troops unused to war, and grips his sword again.
They’re from Fescennia and Aequi Falisci,
Soracte’s heights, Flavinia’s fields, Ciminus’
mountain lake, and Capena’s woods.
They march in ranks and hymn their king,
700 like snowy swans among the drifting clouds
coming back from feeding, when they call
in rhythm from long throats; the river Cayster
and its Asian marshlands echo far and wide.
No one would think armored ranks of a huge force
were mingling here, rather that an airy cloud
of raucous birds was blown from open seas to shore.
239

Here’s Clausus, of ancient Sabine blood. He brings
a great army—himself a match for it. His tribe
of Claudians has now fanned out through Latium,
ever since the Sabines joined with Rome. With him,
710 a huge corps from Amiternum, old Quirites,
a band from Eretum, soldiers from Mutusca’s
groves, Nomentum and Velina’s fields,
Tetrica’s rough crags, Mount Severus,
Casperia, Foruli, and the stream Himella;
men who drink the Tiber or the Fabaris,
men from freezing Nursia, the Ortine ranks,
the Latins and men watered by unlucky
Allia: as many as the waves that cross
the Libyan sea when harsh Orion dips in winter
720 waters, as dense as corn-ears parched by eastern sun
on Hermus’ plains or the tawny fields of Lycia.
Shields clang, Earth trembles at the tramp of feet.
Halaesus, Agamemnon’s son, hater of Troy,
yokes horses to his chariot. He sweeps along
a thousand fierce tribes for Turnus: men who plow
Massica’s vine-rich soil, men sent by Auruncan
elders from their hills, those from Cales and
Sidicinum’s plain, men from the banks of
shallow Volturnus, rough types from Saticula,
730 and a throng of Oscans carrying smooth spears
that come with leather throwing-straps. They battle
hand to hand with sabers, and hold left-handed shields.
Oebalus, my poem won’t pass over you.
They say that Telon sired you with the nymph Sebethis
240

late in life, when he ruled the Teleboeans
in Capreae. His father’s holdings didn’t sate
the son. Now he lords it over broader land—
the Sarrastian tribes, plains watered by the Sarnus,
Rufrae, Batulum, the fields of Celemna,
740 and men within the walls of apple-rich Abella.
They throw boomerangs, like German tribes,
and strip the bark of cork-trees for the helmets
on their heads. Their bronze weapons shimmer.
Ufens, you were sent to war from hilly Nersae.
You have great fame for luck in battle. Your men
are unkempt Aequiculans, who feed themselves
by hunting in the forests. Their soil is hard.
They work the earth while armed, and love to seize
new spoils, and to live off what they steal.
750 Next, priest Umbro of the Marruviï,

bravest of men, sent by King Archippus,
his helmet decked with fronds of fertile olive.
He has the skill to sprinkle sleep on venom-breathing
snakes and vipers by his spells and touch.
With his art, he charms their anger, heals their bites.
But he can’t cure a wound from Trojan iron;
his mesmerizing chants, the herbs he picked
on Marsian hills, will not help his wounds.
Umbro, how Angitia’s forest and Fucinus’
760 glassy waters and clear lakes will weep for you.*
Virbius goes to war as well, Hippolytus’s
handsome son, sent by his mother Aricia.
241

He grew up in Egeria’s grove, near the
marshy shores and laden altars of kindly
Diana. They say his crafty stepmother murdered
Hippolytus, who paid his father’s curse in blood,
torn to pieces by his bolting horses. Yet he
was restored to starry skies and breezes, reborn
through the Healer’s herbs and Diana’s love.
770 Then the mighty Father, outraged that a human
should rise from Hell’s shades to the light of life,
plunged the finder of this healing art
into Styx’s waters with his lightning bolt.
But kind Diana hid Hippolytus and sent
him to the forest of the nymph Egeria,
so he could live a humble life in the Italian
woods, his name changed to Virbius. Horses
are forbidden from her temple and her sacred
groves, since they broke both man and chariot
780 in their terror at the monster from the sea.
On the plains, his son trains high-strung horses as his
father did, and drives a chariot to war.
Turnus, the most handsome, gallops back and forth
before the line, armed and tallest by a head.
His helmet sports a triple plume. The Chimaera’s
on its crown; her jaws breathe Etna’s fire.
The more the fight flows raw with blood,
the more she roars, dark-flamed and feral.
His smooth shield sports a giant emblem: golden
790 Io, raising horns, a cow already clad
in hide, and Argus, the girl’s guardian. Her father,
Inachus, pours water from the embossed urn.
242

Next a cloud of infantry, shields crowded
on the field: Argive men, Aurucan bands,
Rutulians, Sicanian veterans,
a Sacranian column, Labici with painted
shields, those who farm the woods of Tiber
and Numicus’ sacred springs, who till with rakes
Rutulian hills and Circe’s headland (fields that Jove
800 guards with Feronia, who loves green groves); those who
hold Satura’s pitchy marsh, and the lowlands
where the icy Ufens plunges in the sea.
To crown the men, Camilla from the Volscians,
a warrior-queen. She leads a female cavalry
like blooms in bronze. Not for her a woman’s tasks,
Minerva’s spindle or a basket of wool skeins.
She’s steeled for battle and outruns the winds on foot.
She’d fly above the topmost tips of uncut stalks
and not hurt the tender ears when she did,
810 or run across the sea, skimming the high swells,
and not splash her quick feet with the water.
All the young men and a crowd of mothers
flood from homes and fields in wonder as she goes,
gaping in amazement at the royal purple
cloaking her smooth shoulders, the brooch clasping
her hair with gold, the Lycian quiver that she carries,
and the shepherd’s staff of iron-tipped myrtle.

243

BOOK 8

AN EMBASSY TO EVANDER

As bugles blared their strident notes, Turnus waved
the standard on Laurentum’s citadel, spurred
his eager horse, and clanged his sword and shield.
At once, all hearts were thrown in turmoil. In the anxious
tumult, Latium swore loyalty; the young men
raged for war. Messapus, Mezentius
(the mocker of the gods), and Ufens led. They called in
conscripts far and wide and stripped the fields of farmers.
Venulus was sent to noble Diomedes
10 to ask for help. He told him Trojans camped
in Latium—Aeneas’ fleet had docked with his
defeated gods; he claimed he was the fated king.
Many tribes had allied with the Dardan chief;
his name was heard through Latium. What he
meant by these first steps, what he wanted out of
war if Fortune favored him, was perhaps clearer
to Diomedes than to Turnus or Latinus.
This was the scene in Latium. The Trojan hero
knew it all; he tossed on a great tide of worry.
20 His mind flew quickly here and there, shifting
sides, weighing all the options—as quick
as water shimmers back a trembling light
244

when rays of sunshine or the radiant moon
land on the bronze bowl, the beam flutters far
and wide, then angles up and roams the ceiling.

It was night. Deep sleep held the weary animals
of all the lands, the birds and beasts. Father
Aeneas, heartsick at the threat of war,
lay down on the bank beneath the sky’s cold
30 canopy, and finally let himself sleep.
A local god, old Tiberinus, came to him,
rising from his lovely stream among the poplar
branches. He wore flowing gray-green linen;
a crown of reeds shaded his hair. He spoke
and eased Aeneas’ worries with these words:
“Goddess-born, you restore our city, Troy,
and save her heights from enemies forever.
Laurentian lands and Latin fields have longed
for you. Here’s your certain home, your household gods.
40 Don’t give up, or fear the threats of war:
the gods’ swollen anger is all over.*
Soon—in case you think this dream’s a lie—
you’ll find a giant sow by my bank’s oaks,
lying there with thirty newborn in her litter:
a white sow resting, with white piglets suckling.*
By this sign, you’ll know Ascanius will found
famed Alba after thirty years roll by.
I foretell the truth. Now (take note) here’s how
to bring about what’s needed for your victory.
245

50 Pallas’ Arcadians, who followed King

Evander in his war, chose to settle here.
They placed their city, named Pallanteum
after their ancestor, among the hills.
They wage an endless war against the Latins.
Bring them to your camp and make a treaty.
I myself will guide you there along my banks;
you’ll outpace the current with your oars.
Up then, goddess-born: when the stars first set,
60 give Juno her due prayers and calm her angry threats
with humble vows. Honor me after you’ve won:
you’ll see me grazing my banks in full flood,
cutting through the loamy fields, sky-blue
Tiber, the river heaven loves the most. My great
home is here; high Etruria’s my source.”
He sank in the deep river, plunging to its bed.
Night and slumber left Aeneas. He rose
and faced the sun’s glow in the eastern sky,
then ritually cupped river-water in his hands
70 and poured this prayer to the air: “Nymphs,
Laurentian nymphs, source of all the rivers, and you,
father Tiberinus, with your sacred stream,
accept Aeneas and protect him now at last.
Pity my ordeals, wherever your springs
rise, whatever soil you well from in your glory.
I’ll always honor you with gifts and worship,
hornéd river, ruler of Hesperia’s streams.
Just stay close and make your omen true.”
Now he chose two galleys from his fleet,
80 fitting them with rowers and armed men.
246

But see! a sudden marvel met their eyes.
In the woods, they saw a snowy sow
and her white litter, lying on the grassy bank.
Pious Aeneas killed the sow and piglets
for great Juno, and set up an altar.
All that night’s full length, Tiber calmed
his swell and kept his currents still. His surface
was as level as a pond or placid swamp—
no struggle for the oars going upstream.
90 As cheers rose, they hurried on their journey;
the pitch-glazed pine boats smoothly slipped along.
The woods and waters by the banks were dazed to see
far-flashing shields and painted keels in such a place.
The men rowed day and night around long bends.
Varied trees cast shade upon the ships that wove
their way through living woods on silent waters.
When the blazing sun had scaled the heights of sky,
they saw a distant citadel and scattered homes.
(Rome’s strength has since raised these to the heavens,
100 but at that time Evander’s state was poor indeed.)
At once they steered their prows toward the town.
By chance, that day Arcadia’s king was making
annual sacrifice in a forest near the city,
honoring the gods and Hercules. His son
Pallas, other princes, and the humble senate
offered incense with him. The altars steamed with gore.
When they saw the tall ships gliding from
the dusky trees, the crews pulling silent oars,
the sudden sight alarmed them. They sprang up to leave
110 the sacred feast. But brave Pallas would not let
247

the rite be interrupted. He grabbed his spear,
ran toward the ships, and shouted from a knoll:
“Men, why are you trying these uncharted paths?
What is your race? Your home? Where are you heading?
Do you bring peace or war?” From his high stern,
Aeneas proffered a sprig of peaceful olive.
“You see armed Trojans hostile to the Latins,
who rudely drove us off, though we’re refugees.
We look for Evander. Take these words to him:
120 leading Dardan chiefs come asking for a treaty.”
Pallas was struck dumb by Troy’s famous name.
“Disembark, whoever you may be. Address
my father face to face, come to our home as guests!”
He took Aeneas’ hand and clung to it
as they left the river, heading for the grove.

Aeneas hailed the king with friendly words:
“Best of the sons of Greece, Fortune saw fit
that I appeal to you with olive branches bound
by holy ribbons. The fact that you’re Arcadian,
130 a Greek chief, kin to Atreus’s sons—this
didn’t alarm me. Divine oracles, my courage,
our fathers’ shared blood, and your vast fame
have joined us. Fate leads with my consent.
That Dardanus who sailed to the Troad
was Troy’s first father and her founder.* He was
son to Atlas’ child, Electra (so the Greeks say),
that massive Atlas on whose back the earth
is balanced. Now, your father’s Mercury.
248

Shining Maia had him on the snowy peak of
140 Mount Cyllene. But tradition tells us Atlas
who holds up the stars was also Maia’s father.*
So our two peoples split off from one line.
Believing this, I refused to send you envoys
or make some crafty overture. I risk my life,
and approach your door as supplicant.
Those Daunians that hunt you down in war
hunt us as well,* believing if they drive us out
nothing will prevent their taking Italy.
Their rule will reach both seas that lap her shores.
150 Let’s make a pact. We Trojans have hearts strong
in battle. We’re brave and our men are tried in war.”
Evander had been looking at his face
and eyes, scanning all his body. He said:
“How glad I am to welcome and acknowledge
the bravest of the Trojans! How gladly I recall
the words and voice and face of great Anchises!
Priam, Laomedon’s son, visited
our cold Arcadia from Salamis,
the kingdom of Hesione, his sister.
160 At that time my first beard was mere fuzz
upon my cheeks. I admired the Trojan chiefs,
I admired Priam, but Anchises walked
the tallest of them all. I burned with boyish
longing to speak with the hero, to clasp his hand.
I happily escorted him to our city,
Pheneus. When he left he gave me gifts: a lovely
quiver, Lycian arrows, a cloak of golden weave,
a pair of golden bridles that my Pallas has.
249

We’ll join our hands in treaty, as you ask. You’ll go
170 home when dawn arrives, glad to have my help—
I’ll offer what I have. But now, since you’ve
come as allies, share our celebration
of these yearly rites (we can’t postpone them)
and feel at home, feasting among friends.”
Evander ordered that the cleared food and goblets
be reset. He himself seated the guests
on grassy benches. Aeneas had the place of honor
on a maple throne and shaggy lion-skin.
Men picked to help the altar-priest were quick
180 to carry out roast bulls. They heaped the baskets
high with bread, Ceres’ hard-won gift, and offered
wine. Aeneas and the Trojans shared the feast:
whole sides of beef, and organs vowed to gods.
Their hunger gone, their appetite now sated,
King Evander said: “No blind superstition,
no ignorance of early gods, imposed on us
the habit of this ritual feast, this altar to so
great a god. We were saved, Trojan guests,
from awful danger. For this we renew the rites
190 we owe. Once there was a rocky cliff above us;
now its mass is scattered far and wide. The home
it held is empty, its rocks a pile of ruin,
but then it was a vast receding cavern.
In it, out of reach of sunny rays, lurked
the horrible half-human Cacus. The cave’s soil
steamed constantly with still-warm slaughter. Fixed to
the grim doors hung bloodless, rotting heads.
250

Vulcan sired the monster, it was Vulcan’s black flames
that he spewed as he heaved himself around.
200 At last, time brought the help we’d hoped: a god
arrived. He was the greatest of avengers,
proud of butchering and looting Geryon’s
triple bulk—Hercules, driving huge bulls.
These cattle crammed the glen and riverbanks.
But Cacus’ mind, feral, frenzied, could leave
no crime or cunning undared or untried.
He stole from their stabling seven perfect bulls,
seven cows of startling grace. To ensure
their tracks did not face forward, the robber dragged them
210 by their tails to his cave, all signs of their
route reversed, and hid them in the sunless rock.
No one could find tracks that pointed to the cavern.
Meanwhile, the other cows had grazed their fill,
and Hercules was set to leave with all his cattle.
Then the herds began to low. They filled the glen
and hills with protest as they noisily departed.
From the giant cave, one cow mooed back, and
though imprisoned, shattered Cacus’ hopes.
Hercules blazed up with anger and black bile.
220 He grabbed his weapons and his heavy knotted
club and ran for the hill’s summit. Just this
once we saw Cacus afraid, terror in his
eyes. He fled back to his cave, faster than
the wind—it was fear that winged his feet—
and shut himself inside, breaking the iron chains
Vulcan had forged to hold a giant boulder
that hung at the entry. It fell and blocked the access.
Just then Hercules arrived in all his fury.
251

He scanned the cliff, looked here and there,
230 and gnashed his teeth. Three times he furiously
circled the Aventine Hill and stormed that rocky
entrance: it was no use. Three times he sank back.
A flinty tower, sheer on every side, rose up
from the rooftop of the cave, a fitting home
for stinking vultures’ nests. It leaned to the left,
toward the river. Grabbing it, he jammed it
hard the other way, then tore it from its base
and hurled it down with force. It landed with a crash:
the heavens boomed, the water in the stream
240 leapt up and fell back on itself in fear.
Cacus’ cavern, his huge home, appeared.
The dark grotto was laid open to its core
as if the earth had cracked under some force,
gaping to the heart of Hell, the pallid lands
loathed by the gods; as if the vast abyss below
were visible, and ghosts trembled at the light.
Cacus was caught by the sudden glare, and trapped
inside the hollow rock, howling now
in a new key! The hero’s arrows rained on him,
250 and any weapons he could find, branches and huge
boulders. Cacus had to deal with the danger.
He belched a giant smoke-cloud from his jaws,
amazingly, and wrapped his home in inky fog,
stealing it from view. From inside his cave
he spewed out smoky fire mixed with darkness.
Hercules lost patience. He took a headlong leap
right through the flames, where the smoke seethed
densely, black clouds warping in the heat.
252

As Cacus spouted useless fire into the dark,
260 the hero grabbed him in a strangling chokehold.
His eyes bulged out and blood drained from his throat.
His pitch-black lair lay open, the doors ripped away.
At once the stolen cattle and his lies
were exposed for all to see. The monstrous corpse
was dragged out by the feet. Our men could not
get their fill of looking at its awful eyes
and face, the chest of matted hair, his jaws’ dead flames.
Since then, grateful generations such as we
have marked this day. Potitius established it,
270 and now the Pinariï watch over it.
In a forest, they set up this altar we call
‘greatest.’ It will always be the greatest.
Come, men, wreathe your hair with leaves to praise him,
hold out goblets in your hands, call on
our shared god, offer him wine willingly.”
He veiled his hair with braided fronds of poplar,
the dappled shady growth of Hercules’ tree,
then took up a sacred goblet. All were glad to
pour wine on the altar and call upon the gods.
280 Meanwhile heaven circled and the sky grew dark.

The priests, led by Potitius and wearing pelts
(the custom), carried torches. They resumed the feast
and brought in welcome offerings for the second course,
heaping up the tables with the loaded plates.
The Saliï chanted around the lighted altars,
their heads ringed with poplar—two choruses,
one young, one old, to chant Hercules’ famous deeds:
how he grabbed and throttled with his hand
253

snakes sent by his stepmother, twin monsters;
290 how he overthrew outstanding cities, Troy and
Oechalia, and endured a thousand
tasks set by Eurystheus and hostile Juno.
“Unconquered one, you killed the cloud-born Centaurs,
Pholus and Hylaeus, with bare hands, you killed
the Cretan hybrid and the giant Nemean lion.
Stygian waters trembled, and so did Orcus’ guard,
lying on half-eaten bones in his blood-stained
cave. No shape could scare you—not even Typhoeus,
towering and armed. You devised a way
300 to kill the Hydra as its heads bobbed all around you!
Hail, true son of Jupiter, the gods’ own glory,
be present and support us and your rites.”
So they celebrated him in song, with Cacus’
cave as climax, and the half-man breathing fire.
The forests rang with sound, the hills echoed it back.
When the rites were over, they turned back to town.
The king proceeded slowly, burdened by his age.
He kept Pallas and Aeneas close,
lightening the walk with varied tales.
310 Aeneas admired everything. Charmed by the site,
he gladly looked at what Evander noted, asking for,
and hearing of, the memories of men of old.
King Evander, founder of Rome’s stronghold, said:
“Native fauns and nymphs once held these groves,
and a race of men from hardy oak-tree trunks.
They had no culture and no customs, no notion
of yoking bulls, amassing wealth, or storing food.
Acorns fed them, and hunting’s harsh livelihood.
254

Saturn was first to come from high Olympus,
320 fleeing war with Jupiter, an exile with no
kingdom. He united the unruly race
that was scattered on the mountains, gave them laws,
and called it Latium—he’d safely hidden here.*
He was king during the age called Golden
and he ruled the people in unbroken peace
until a duller and degraded age came in,
mad for war, greedy for gain. Then came
Ausonian mobs and Sicanian tribes.
The land of Saturn often changed its name.
330 Next came many kings and the cruel giant Thybris—
we Italians named the river Tiber for him.
The ancient name of Albula was lost. And I:
I was an exile sailing to the ends of Ocean.
Ineluctable all-powerful Fate settled me
here. The dread warnings of my mother, the nymph
Carmentis, drove me, and the god Apollo’s plans.”
Evander pointed out the altar on their path,
and the Carmental Gate (so the Romans call it),
an ancient tribute to the nymph Carmentis, who sang
340 the fates and first foretold the future of Aeneas’
noble sons and the famed Pallanteum.
He showed the spacious grove used by stern Romulus
as a refuge, then, in a cliff’s cool shade,
the Lupercal, named for Arcadia’s Lycian Pan.
He marked out Argiletum’s sacred pasture,
and swore that his guest Argus died right here.* Next
came the Tarpeian Rock and then the Capitol,
golden now, rough then with thorny thickets.
255

Even then, the eerie godhead of the place
350 alarmed the nervous farmers, who trembled at the
woods and rock. “A god lives in this very grove
and leafy hill (we don’t know who). Our men
believe they can see Jupiter himself, shaking
his black shield in his hand and bringing storms.
You see these two towns, their walls in ruins?
They’re what’s left of monuments to men of old.
Janus founded this stronghold, and Saturn that:
one’s Janiculum, one Saturnia.”
With such talk they neared Evander’s humble home.
360 Herds were everywhere, lowing in the Forum
and the grand Carinae. When they reached
his house, he said, “Triumphant Hercules
came in this door, this king’s lodging hosted him.
My guest, dare to despise wealth! Be like
a god yourself. Don’t look down on my poverty.”
He led massive Aeneas under this narrow roof
and set him down on bedding: the skinned pelt of
a Libyan bear on heaped-up stacks of leaves.
Night fell, wrapping Earth with dusky wings.
370 Venus, fearful for her son and rightly fretful

at the Latins’ threats and angry clamor,
now spoke to Vulcan in their golden bedroom,
breathing divine love into her words:
“Dearest husband: when Greek kings destroyed
doomed Troy, and her citadel was falling
to the flames, I didn’t seek help for the victims,
I didn’t ask for weapons from your skill and strength.
I didn’t want your labor to be wasted,
256

though I owed much to Priam’s sons and often
380 wept over Aeneas’ hardships. Now, as Jove
commands, he’s landed on Rutulian shores.
So I’ve come to beg you after all—you whom
I adore—to ask for weapons for my son.
The mothers Thetis and Aurora moved you once
with tears. See how nations mass, how cities
sharpen swords behind locked gates to kill
my boy.” As Vulcan wavered, Venus wrapped
her snowy arms around him in a soft embrace.
At once he felt the well-known flame. It sank
390 into his bones and ran along his weakened frame
just as forked lightning and its flash of light
tear through dark clouds with a thundering crash.
His wife knew her effect. Her cunning pleased her.
Vulcan, bound by his undying love, asked her:
“Why bring up the past? Goddess, where’s your faith
in me? If you’d worried then, I’d have justly
armed the Trojans. Neither Fate nor mighty
Jupiter forbade Troy and king Priam
to survive for ten more years. Now too,
400 if you prepare to fight and your mind is set,
any care I can promise in my art,
whatever can be made with molten iron and
electrum, whatever flames and wind can do—
don’t beg, don’t doubt your power!”* He made love
to her as he desired. Then, lying draped
on his wife’s breasts, he let slumber wind through him.
When a few hours of rest had banished sleep,
he rose. It was after midnight, when a woman
257

forced to use Minerva’s loom to make her living
410 rises to add nighttime to her work, and pokes
the dormant embers. She calls the slaves to lamp-light
for the lengthy work of carding—all to keep
her widowed bed untouched and raise the little ones.
As industriously, the lord of fire
left his downy bed to labor at the forge.
An island rises near Lipare and the coast
of Sicily. It’s steep, crusted in smoking rocks.
Beneath it lie the caves of Etna, eaten hollow
by the thunderous forges of the Cyclopes.
420 Strong blows strike the shrieking anvils in the din,
iron ingots hiss in furnaces with flames
dancing around them: it’s Vulcan’s home, Vulcania.
The lord of fire flew here from the sky.
Steropes, Brontes, and bare-armed Pyragmon
were wielding iron in the massive cave.
They held a roughly hammered thunderbolt,
part polished, part unformed. The father of the gods
hurls these endlessly from sky to earth.
They’d soldered on three strikes of twisting hail,
430 three each of storm, red fire, and winged south wind.
They added terrifying flashes, thunder,
fear, and the heat that follows rage.
Elsewhere they were busy with Mars’ chariot
on flying wheels, the one he rides to enflame men
and cities, and polished eagerly a ghastly shield
for angered Pallas; it had golden serpent scales,
intertwining snakes, and at the center,
headless Gorgon, still too grim to look at.
“Cyclopes of Etna!” he yelled. “Drop your work,
258

440 set aside your projects, pay attention!

We must forge weapons for a fierce warrior.
Now’s the time for strength, quick hands, and expert skill.
Hurry!” At this, they set to work at once,
splitting up the tasks. Bronze and gold ore
ran in rivulets, wounding chalyb* melted
in a massive furnace. They made a giant shield
to equal all the weapons of the Latins, welding
it with seven layers, circle upon circle.
Some drew in air and pumped it out with puffing bellows,
450 others tempered hissing bronze in water.
The cave groaned with the anvils’ weight. Their arms
swung in a forceful rhythm, up and down,
as they twisted hot ore with their gripping tongs.
While the lord of Lemnos urged this work on them,
the gentle light and sunrise song of birds
called Evander from his humble home.
The old man rose, wrapped his body in a tunic,
and tied on Tuscan sandals. He attached a sword-belt
to his side and took up a Tegean shield.
460 A cloak of panther’s hide hung at his left.
Two watchdogs went before him, crossing the high
threshold, and matched their master’s steps. The hero
headed for the sheltered lodging of his guest
Aeneas, mindful of his promise to give aid.
Aeneas too was up this early. With Evander
had come Pallas; with Aeneas, Achates.
They met, clasped hands, and sat down in the courtyard.
At last they could have a frank exchange.
King Evander started: “Greatest leader
259

470 of the Trojans (while you live, I won’t

admit Troy’s kingdom has collapsed), despite
our fame, our resources for war are thin.
Tuscan Tiber hems us on one side, Rutulians
threaten on the other. Their weapons clang around
our town. But I have allies for you: large nations
and armed camps with many kingdoms. Fortune gives
this unexpected aid—your presence must be fated!
Not far from here, there’s a city built of ancient
stone, Agylla, where the Lydians, famed
480 in battle, once settled the Tuscan hills.
But this town that flowered many years fell to
King Mezentius’ cruel and brutal rule.
I won’t dwell on this tyrant’s godless murders
or barbarity. May the gods store it all up
for him and his! He used to yoke the living
to the dead, hand to hand and face to face,
a form of torture, so they died a lingering death,
dripping pus and gore within that grim embrace.
At last the citizens, sick of this horror, took up
490 arms and blocked the madman in his home.
They killed his allies and threw torches on his roof.
But in the carnage he escaped to the Rutulians.
Now he’s defended by his ally Turnus’ army.
All Etruria has risen up in rightful outrage.
They want the king for punishment, or else it’s war.
Aeneas, I’ll make you leader of these thousands,
whose ships are packed along the shore. They shout
for battle’s start, but an ancient seer stops them
by singing of the fates: ‘Lydia’s chosen men,
500 finest flower of an ancient race: righteous
260

anger at Mezentius drives you to war.
But no Italian may guide your great people.
You must await a foreign leader.’ Fearing
the gods’ warning, they’ve pitched camp on this plain.
Now Tarchon sends me envoys with a crown
and scepter, hoping that I’ll join the camp
and take the Tuscan throne. But my old age,
worn out by years, cold and sluggish, grudges me
such leadership. I’m too old for daring deeds.
510 I’d urge my son, but his mother, Sabella’s
Italian, and his blood is mixed. Fate favors
your age, your race, and the gods ask for you:
march on, bravest chief of Trojans and Italians!
And I’ll lend you Pallas, my hope and comfort:
he’ll learn to be a soldier and do Mars’ grim
labor, from your leadership. Let him
admire you from the start. From me he’ll have
two hundred horsemen, the core of our strength,
and he’ll bring as many on his own account.”
520 Staunch Achates and Aeneas remained still,

eyes fixed on the ground, brooding over
all their hardships with sad hearts. But now
Venus sent a signal from the cloudless sky.
A sudden, booming lightning bolt came flashing
from above. The world seemed to reel,
the ring of Tuscan trumpets sounded through the air.
As they looked up, thunder cracked repeatedly.
Where the sky was clear they saw a single cloud:
in it, swords appeared to turn blood-red and clash.
530 The others were astonished, but the Trojan hero
261

knew the thunder of his divine mother’s pledge.
“My host,” he said, “there’s no need to ask
what these signs mean. Olympus summons me.
My goddess mother said she’d send this omen
if war was imminent, and bring Vulcan’s armor
from the sky to help. What carnage is in store
for the poor Laurentians! Turnus, how you’ll
pay! Tiber, how many helmets, shields, and bodies
of the brave you’ll tumble in your stream!
540 Let the Latins break the treaty and wage war!”
Aeneas spoke, and rose from where he sat.
He lit Hercules’s smoking altars, gladly
honoring the humble house-gods, as he’d done
the day before. Evander offered chosen sheep
as due; the Trojans did the same. Afterward,
Aeneas went back to his crews still at the ships
and chose the bravest men to follow him to war.
The others glided downstream on the river’s
helpful current, bringing news of these affairs
550 and of his father to Ascanius. Trojans
bound for Tuscan fields were given horses.
For Aeneas, they brought a special one; it wore
a tawny lion pelt that gleamed with gilded claws.
Rumor flew right through the little town at once:
horsemen were riding fast for Tuscan lands!
Frightened mothers renewed prayers, fear grew
with danger, and war’s specter now loomed larger.
As Pallas left, Evander clasped his hand, clinging
to his son, sobbing inconsolably:
262

560 “If only Jupiter would give me back my youth,

the man I was when I subdued the front lines
at Praeneste and burned great piles of shields!
I sent King Erulus to Hell by this right hand.
Feronia, his mother, gave him three lives at birth
(dreadful to tell), and three sets of armor.
I had to strike him down three times, but still,
this hand took those triple lives and triple armor.
Then I’d never be wrenched from your sweet embrace,
my son. Mezentius would not have put so many
570 to the sword, insulting me, his neighbor;
our town would not be widowed all the time.
O powers above, and Jupiter, great ruler
of the gods, pity this Arcadian king, I beg;
hear a father’s prayer. If fate and your strength
keep my Pallas safe, if I’ll live to see him
and rejoin him, let me live. I can endure
anything. But Fortune, if you threaten
the unspeakable, let me cut off this cruel
life right now, while my worry is still vague,
580 while there’s halting hope for what’s to come,
while I hold you, dear son, my late and only
joy. May no painful news come to these ears.”
As he poured this out at their last meeting,
he collapsed. The house-slaves carried him inside.
Now the cavalry left from the open gates,
Aeneas and loyal Achates in the lead,
then the other Trojan princes. Among his troops,
Pallas stood out in his cloak and ornamented
armor—like the Morning Star still wet with Ocean’s
263

590 waves, his sacred face rising to dispel darkness,

Venus’ favorite among the fiery stars.
The anxious mothers stood along the walls, watching
the dusty cloud and troops gleaming in bronze.
They rode with weapons through the brush, the shortest way.
A shout went up and all fell into line;
their horses’ pounding hooves crumbled the soil.
There was a grove by cool Caere’s stream,
held holy far and wide by age-old traditions.
It was ringed all round by hills of somber spruce.
600 The story’s that the old Pelasgians, the first
to live in Italy, vowed it to Silvanus,
god of fields and flocks, and chose his holy day.
Tarchon and the Tuscans made camp nearby
in a safe place. From the heights, all the legions
could be seen, their tents pitched through the fields.
Aeneas joined them with his chosen warriors.
Tired, they tended to their horses and themselves.
Now Venus, shining goddess, came with gifts
through heaven’s clouds. From afar she saw her son
610 in a secluded valley, alone by a cold stream.
She appeared to him and spoke these words:
“Look: your gifts, perfected by my husband’s
art, as promised. So, my son, don’t hesitate
to call to war fierce Turnus and the proud
Laurentians.” She embraced her child and set
his gleaming weapons by an oak. Aeneas,
delighted by this honor, couldn’t get his fill of
looking at the goddess’ gifts. In awe, he scanned
each detail, turning over in his hands
264

620 the helmet pouring out its flamelike crest,

the deadly sword, the breastplate stiff with bronze
—massive, blood-red, like a dark cloud set afire
by the sun’s bright rays and blazing in the sky—
the smooth greaves of electrum and forged gold, the spear
and the shield’s engraving, complex beyond words.
The lord of fire, who knew of prophecies about
ages to come, had carved on it Italy’s history:*
Roman triumphs, all the generations of
Ascanius’s line, and their wars in sequence.
630 He’d carved a she-wolf sprawled in Mars’ green grotto.
She’d whelped, and twin boys played around her teats,
hanging on them, suckling on their mother
without fear. She nuzzled them in turn, bending
her soft neck, licking their forms into shape.
Vulcan set Rome nearby, and the Sabines
lawlessly abducted from the theater
at the Circus Games, and a sudden war
with old Tatius and his severe Cures.
Next, the same two kings stood armed before Jove’s
640 altar, their conflict laid aside, holding bowls.
They’d sacrificed a pig to sanctify their peace.
Close by, chariot teams had charged apart,
dismembering Mettus (he should have kept his word!).
Tullus dragged the traitor’s entrails through the wood;
the thorns were drenched with bloody dew. Porsenna
ordered Rome to take back banished Tarquin
and ringed the city with a massive siege;
Aeneas’ heirs died on the swords for liberty.
See his lifelike look—menacing and angry,
650 because Cocles dared to wreck the bridge,
265

Cloelia to break her chains and swim the river.
Manlius, guarding the Tarpeian fort,
the temple, and high Capitol, was at the top.
Romulus’s roof was bristly with new thatch.
A silver goose flapped in a golden portico
warning that the Gauls were at the gates.
They lurked in the bush, about to take the fort,
covered by the dark, the gift of inky night.
Their flowing hair was gold, their clothes were gold,
660 their striped cloaks gleamed, twisted gold circled
their milky necks. In their hands were glinting
double Alpine spears; long shields hid their bodies.
He’d pounded out the leaping Saliï and naked
priests of Pan, their caps tufted with wool, and shields
fallen from the sky. In cushioned carriages,
chaste mothers carried sacred vessels through the town.
Far off he placed Tartarus and Dis’ high gates
(the wages of wickedness) and Catiline,
dangling from an overhang, fearful of the
670 Furies. The pious were set apart, receiving
Cato’s laws. Between it all flowed Ocean’s image,
a golden swell with dark blue white-capped waves.
Around the rim, silver dolphins swept the surface
with their tails, cutting through the surging sea.
In the center sailed bronze warships: they fought
the sea battle of Actium. Cape Leucas, its waves
bright with gold, frothed with the armada.
Here Augustus Caesar led all Italy
to war: the Senate, people, gods of sky and hearth.*
680 From high on the stern, his bright brow poured
266

twin flames; his father’s comet rose above.
Tall Agrippa steered the fleet, with gods and winds
behind him. He wore a naval crown; on it gleamed
bright images of prows, a martial honor.
Antony was opposite, with Asian wealth
and hodgepodge troops,* victor over Eastern hordes
and the Red Sea. He brought Egypt, Eastern might,
distant Bactra—and (for shame!) a wife from Egypt.
The forces smashed together and the whole sea frothed,
690 torn by oars and three-spiked beaks of boats.
The crews made for the open. Massive ships rammed towering
sterns—you’d think the Cyclades, torn up, were free
to roam the waters, or that mountains smashed together.
Flaming flax and flying spears rained from their hands,
and just-spilled blood turned Neptune’s fields red.
In the thick of it, the queen called to her fleet
with her native rattle—not seeing the pair of snakes
behind her. Monstrous mongrel gods and barking
Anubis turned weapons against Venus, Neptune,
700 and Minerva. Iron Mars was in their midst, mad
for battle. Awful Furies swooped in from the sky,
and Discord in her tattered cloak joined gladly.
Bellona followed with her bloody whip.
Apollo saw this* from his shrine, and aimed his bow.
At that, every Indian and Egyptian,
every Arab and Sabaean, cut and ran.
The queen herself was calling to the winds,
loosening the lanyards, in flight under full sail.
The lord of fire made her pale with future death,*
710 swept by waves and wind amid the sea of blood.
Opposite, he’d carved the mighty Nile in mourning,
267

opening his garment’s folds, welcoming
the conquered to his blue-green bays and hidden streams.
But Caesar rode to Rome in triple triumph, and made
the gods of Italy an immortal vow:
three hundred spacious shrines across the city.
The roads rang with joy, applause, and revelry.
Bands of women were at every shrine and altar,
where slaughtered calves covered the ground. He himself,
720 seated by the snowy marble temple of bright
Apollo, reviewed the nations’ gifts, to be fastened
on proud doorposts. A long row of conquered tribes
filed by, distinct in clothes, weapons, and languages.
Vulcan had forged Nomads, loose-robed Africans,
the Cares, Leleges, and Scythian archers,
the Euphrates, meeker now, the remote
Morini and the two-horned Rhine, the untamed
Dahae, and Araxes upset at his bridge.
Aeneas admires Vulcan’s shield, his mother’s gift,
730 pleased by images he does not understand.
He hoists the fame and fate of his descendants.

268

BOOK 9

NISUS AND EURYALUS

While these events unfolded far away, Juno,
Saturn’s daughter, sent Iris from the sky to find
bold Turnus. By chance he was sitting in a sacred
valley, in his ancestor Pilumnus’ woods.
Iris, child of Thaumas, spoke to him from rosy
lips: “Turnus, time’s orbit brings you freely what
no god would dare to promise. Aeneas leaves
his camp, his fleet and troops, making for
Evander’s palace on the Palatine,
10 then farther still, all the way to distant towns
in Corythus, to arm a band of Lydian farmers.
Don’t wait: now’s the time to call for horse and
chariot. Surprise their camp and storm it.”
With this, she rose into the sky on level wings,
drawing a huge arc beneath the clouds.
Turnus knew her. He stretched up his hands,
following her flight with words: “Iris, heaven’s
glory, who sent you to me from the clouds?
There’s a sudden glimmer in the air, the sky
20 divides to show the circling constellations.
I’ll follow this great omen, no matter who
calls me to war.” He approached the stream

269

and drank from its clear surface, then begged the gods
at length, his prayers piling in the sky.

All the army now marched on the open fields,
rich in horsemen, sumptuous garb, and gold.
Messapus rallied the front lines, Tyrrhus’ sons
the rear. Turnus led the column’s center.
30 They moved like the silent swell of the deep Ganges,
fed by seven gentle streams; like the Nile’s
life-giving water when it overflows, then ebbs.
Suddenly, the Trojans saw a dusty black cloud
taking shape, darkness shadowing the plain.
From the ramparts, Caius was the first to shout:
“What’s that swirling globe of dirt and dust?
Quick, bring swords and spears, man the walls:
the enemy’s upon us!” Clattering, they
retreated through the gates and crammed into the camp.
40 This was the mighty warrior Aeneas’ order
as he left: in case of crisis, they shouldn’t dare
to draw up ranks or trust to open battle,
but guard the camp within the safety of the walls.
So, though shame and rage called them to fight,
they blocked the gates and followed orders, armed
inside the towers, waiting for the enemy.
Turnus took twenty from the cavalry and rode
ahead, his horse a snowy dappled Thracian, his helmet
gold and crimson-crested. The army followed him.
50 He caught the camp unready. “Men,” he cried,
270

“who comes with me, who’s first to charge the enemy?”
He hurled his spear through the air, an overture
to war, and raced across the plain. His men
took up his shout and followed with a curdling cry.
They marveled at the Trojans’ coward hearts—how they
shunned the battle on the field and sat snug
in their camp. Turnus, frantic for an entrance,
rode back and forth to scan the walls. Nothing.
As a wolf prowls around a crowded sheepfold,
60 howling by its gate, pelted in the dark
by wind and rain, while ewes keep safe the lambs
bleating beneath them; beside himself, the wolf
is mad for what he cannot have, exhausted
by long famine, his dry jaws parched for blood—
just so Turnus’ anger flared up as he probed
the walls and camp. Rage burned in his bones.
How could he find an entrance? How shake out
the nesting Trojans and spill them on the plain?
Their fleet was anchored near the camp, guarded
70 on each side by earthworks and the river.
He called for fire from his cheering friends,
took up a flaming brand and stormed the ships.
His men leapt to work, spurred by Turnus’ presence.
All took up lit torches looted from the fires.
The pitch-smeared pine produced a sooty light
and Vulcan wafted sparks and ashes to the stars.
What god, O Muses, repelled the hungry blaze?
Who kept the fire from the fleet? Tell me.
Ancient times trusted this tale; its fame lives on.
80 When Aeneas first built his fleet on Phrygian Ida
271

to sail the ocean’s depths, Cybele (so they say),
mother of the gods, addressed great Jupiter:
“My son, since you’ve tamed Olympus, grant
this favor that your loving mother asks.
On a mountain summit was a grove I loved
for many years, where people brought me offerings.
Pitch-pine trees and maples lent it murky shade.
I gave it to Aeneas when he needed ships,
and gladly so, but fear makes me anxious now.
90 Comfort me and grant your mother’s prayer: don’t let
the boats be swamped at sea by waves or whirlwinds.
Let it help them that my mountain was their home.”
Her son, who spins the constellations, said, “Mother,
how would you bend fate? What is this hope?
Should boats produced by mortal hands enjoy
immortal rights? Should Aeneas confront danger
without danger? What god has such power?
But when their task is done, when they’ve reached the ports
of Italy, I’ll take away the earthly form
100 of the boats who brought Trojan Aeneas
to Laurentian fields, and make them ocean
goddesses, like Doto the Nereïd
or Galatea, fronting sea-foam as they swim.”
He swore this by his Stygian brother’s streams,
the banks that boil with pitch, the black abyss,
shaking all Olympus with his nod.
The promised day had come, and the Fates discharged
the debt of time. Turnus’ onslaught cued the Mother
to keep the sacred fleet safe from the fire.
110 First a strange light blazed before their eyes.
272

From the east, a huge cloud carrying the goddess’
worshippers traversed the heavens. Then a dreadful
voice boomed down and deafened both the armies.
“Trojans, don’t be anxious to defend my ships
or fight. Turnus can’t burn down my sacred fleet
any more than burn the waves. Goddesses,
go freely: your Mother commands you.” At once
the boats broke off their moorings from the bank
and dived down to the depths, plunging in beak-first
120 as dolphins do. Then, a miracle to tell:
nymphs in equal numbers rose to ride the waves.*
The Rutulians were stunned, the horses reared,
even Messapus felt fear. The Tiber slowed
its raucous course, then retreated from the sea.
Yet this barely touched bold Turnus’ confidence.
Instead he raised their spirits—and added a rebuke:
“These omens target Trojans! Jove himself
held back his usual help from them—we didn’t
130 need to torch the boats. Now these men can’t cross
the sea, and there’s nowhere to run! Half the world
is out of reach, we control this land, and countless
weapons arm the tribes of Italy. The gods’ signs
that the Trojans boast of scare me not at all.
The fates and Venus have their due: Phrygians reached
the fertile soil of Italy. And here’s my fate:
to extirpate this evil race who stole my wife.
That pain doesn’t only touch the sons of
Atreus: just wars are fought by others too.
140 It’s enough that Troy fell once? That they stole once
should be enough; you’d think they’d shun
273

all women now. Their barricades and ditches
give them heart—small delays before their death!
Didn’t they see the walls of Troy collapse in flames?
Those were built by Neptune’s hand! My chosen band,
who’s prepared to follow me, to wreck the ramparts
with his sword and storm the quaking camp?
I don’t need Vulcan’s armor or a thousand ships
to fight the Teucrians. All Tuscany can join them!
150 No need for them to fear the night, cowards
stealing the Palladium, murdered sentries
on the heights, or a horse’s hidden womb.
We’ll ring their walls with fire in the light of day.
I’ll make sure they realize they’re not facing
the Greek soldiers Hector held off for ten years.
But now the better part of day is done.
Rest yourselves for what remains, be happy
with a job well done, and expect a fight!”
Messapus was told to block the gates with
160 sentries and set watch-fires round the walls.
Rutulians were picked to guard the camp,
fourteen of them. Each led a hundred men,
purple-plumed and bright with golden armor.
They dispersed, taking up the watch in turn,
or sprawling on the grass, enjoying wine,
tilting back bronze wine-bowls. The fires twinkled
as the sentries passed the sleepless night in games.
The Trojans watched this from the ramparts, on guard
with their weapons. Worrying, they checked
170 the gates, built high gangways linking towers,
and stockpiled spears. Fierce Serestus and Mnestheus
274

spurred them on. These two were Aeneas’ choice
as the soldiers’ leaders, their strategists in crisis.
The whole force on the walls shared in the risks
of night-watch, each man at a post assigned by lot.
Nisus, fearless in a fight, guarded the gate—
Hyrtacus’ son, quick with lances and light arrows,
whom the huntress Ida sent to serve Aeneas.
His friend was Euryalus. Among the troops
180 there was no warrior more handsome—a boy
whose unshaved chin showed puberty’s first fuzz.
They shared one mind, one heart; they rushed to battle
side by side. Now they shared watch at the gate.
Nisus asked: “Do gods enflame our hearts,
Euryalus, or do our fierce desires become
our gods? I’m not content with idleness.
I’ve long been keen to fight, to do something
heroic. You see how cocksure these Rutulians are.
Their fires are far apart, and they’re sprawled around,
190 slack with wine and sleep. All’s quiet. So hear
what I’ve been wondering, how my thoughts are taking shape.
The leaders and the army want to send news
to Aeneas and recall him to the camp.
If they give you my reward (the glory of
the exploit is enough for me), I think I see
a path along that hill to Pallanteum’s walls.”
Euryalus was stunned. A deep desire struck him
to win fame too, and he asked his fervent friend:
“Nisus, I’m not included in this crucial mission?
200 I’m supposed to send you into danger all
alone? That’s not how my father taught me—war-steeled
275

Opheltes, who raised me during the Greek horror
and Troy’s hardships. That’s not how I’ve acted
at your side, risking death for great Aeneas.
I scorn the light of day! To me, this fame you want
is a bargain at the cost of losing life.”
Nisus said: “I hardly feared you were a coward—
the thought! I swear it, by my hopes that Jove
(or any god who’s just) brings me back a victor.
210 But if, as often happens in this sort of plan,
some god or chance puts me in jeopardy,
I want you to survive. You’re young, you deserve
to live. If my body’s rescued, or else ransomed,
I need you to bury me. If Fortune won’t
allow that, gift my absence with a tomb
and funeral. I don’t want to bring such grief
to your poor mother, the only one of all of them
who dared to follow you and leave Acestes’ town.”
Euryalus said: “You can grope for reasons:
220 there’s no point. I won’t change my mind.
Let’s go.” He roused some guards to take their place
and keep the watch in turn, then left his post,
heading off with Nisus to locate their king.
All the other living things throughout the land
were giving up their cares to sleep, their hearts
at rest from trouble. But a chosen set
of Trojan leaders were conferring on the crisis:
What to do? Who should take a message to
Aeneas? They stood in the middle of the camp,
230 leaning on long spears, gripping shields.
Both Nisus and Euryalus begged urgently
276

to be admitted at once on a crucial matter,
worth the time. Iülus let the eager pair
join in, and told Nisus to speak. Hyrtacus’
son began: “Aeneas’ generals, hear us fairly.
Don’t judge our offer by our age. The Rutulians
are silent, slack with wine and sleep. We’ve found
a place to bypass them, a spot to sneak through
by the gate that’s closest to the sea.
Some sentry fires are out, others sputter
240 smokily. If you’ll let us take this chance
to reach Aeneas in Pallanteum, we’ll be
back here soon with spoils from many dead.
We won’t get lost: we’ve often hunted in the
dark dells near the city and we know the river.”
At this Aletes, bent with years but wise of mind
said: “Gods of Troy, whose power guards us always:
you don’t intend to ruin the Trojans after all!
Such brave young men you’ve given us, such steadfast
250 hearts.” Tears streaming down his face,
he clasped their shoulders and right hands. “What gifts,
you two, what presents could be worthy of your
bravery? The gods, and your own conduct
will grant the first and finest one. Pious Aeneas
will swiftly give the rest, as will Ascanius,
still so young, who’ll recall this all his life.”
Ascanius broke in: “In fact I beg you both
(since I’m only safe if Father’s back)
by our great house-gods, Assaracus’ Lar,
260 and white-haired Vesta’s shrine: I place my life,
my trust, in you. Bring back my father, set him
in my sight. Once he’s here, all will be well.
277

I’ll give you double goblets chased in silver
that my father took after Arisba’s fall,
two tripods, two large golden ingots, and an antique
bowl Sidonian Dido gave to me.
If we seize the soil and scepter of this land,
when I give out spoils by lot, I’ll put aside
the horse that Turnus rode, and his golden armor
270 —you saw them, Nisus—to be yours, your prize,
that horse, the shield, and Turnus’ crimson plumes.
Father will include twelve slave-girls chosen
for their beauty, and male captives with their weapons.
And more: all the land that King Latinus owns.
Euryalus, amazing boy, your age is nearer
to mine. I take you as my friend with all my heart,
to come with me no matter what I face.
I’ll never look for glory in your absence.
In peace and war, in words and deeds, you’re the one
280 I’ll trust the most.” Euryalus replied:
“No day will see me falling short of today’s daring
—as long as Fortune smiles on us. But besides
these many gifts, I ask one thing. I have a mother
from Priam’s ancient race. Poor thing, neither Troy
nor King Acestes’ town kept her from coming
with me. I haven’t told her of my mission,
which may be dangerous, nor have I said goodbye
because—I swear by night and your right hand—
I couldn’t bear to see her tears. I beg you:
290 help her in her need and loneliness.
Let me take this hope with me, and I’ll go
still more bravely into danger.” This moved
278

the Dardans and they wept, handsome Iülus
above all. The image of this filial love
tore at his heart. He responded: “I’ll do
everything your great feat earns for you.
She’ll be a mother to me—only the name Creusa
will be lacking. No small thanks await her
for raising such a son. Whatever happens, I swear
300 by my own life, as my father used to do:
the gifts I promise if your mission turns out well,
those will still go to your mother’s family.”
In tears, he untied his gilded sword
and ivory scabbard. Lycaon of Knossos
forged it long ago with wondrous skill.
Mnestheus gave a lion-skin torn from
a shaggy beast, loyal Aletes traded helmets.
They armed and left at once; the group of leaders,
young and old, saw them to the gate.
310 Handsome Iülus, too, mature before his years
and with a grown man’s cares, gave them many
mandates for his father. But the breezes
dispersed his words into the clouds, unheard.
They crossed the trenches to the fatal camp
in dark of night, bringing death to many
on the way. They saw bodies everywhere,
sprawled throughout the grass in drunken sleep,
chariots propped up on the shore, men lying
among the wheels and harnesses, wine goblets
and weapons. Hyrtacus’ son spoke first:
“Euryalus, it’s time to strike: the moment’s here,
320 and so’s our path. Keep watch against an ambush
279

from the rear. Be careful, look around you.
I’ll make this camp a graveyard, and clear us a wide swath.”
Then he fell silent. With his sword, he crept
toward proud Rhamnes, who by chance was sleeping
on a layered heap of rugs, and snoring loudly.
He was a king and augur loved by Turnus, but his
skill did not prevent his death. Near him, Nisus
killed three slaves who rashly slept among the weapons,
330 then Remus’ armor-bearer and charioteer, slashing
their drooping necks as they slept under their horses.
Next he struck away their master’s head, leaving
his body sobbing blood; warm gore soaked the earth
and bedding. He killed Lamyrus and Lamus,
then youthful Serranus, famous for his looks,
who’d played cards until the early hours, then
succumbed to wine—happier, if he’d only
played all night and carried on to dawn.
He was like a starving lion bringing chaos
340 to a sheepfold, when mindless hunger makes him tear
the soft sheep mute with fear; he roars with bloody jaws.
Euryalus matched Nisus’ killing. On fire himself,
he mowed down the rank and file before him,
Abaris, Fadus, and Herbesus—all unaware.
But Rhoetus was awake and saw it all.
Terrified, he crouched behind a giant wine-jar.
As he tried to rise, Euryalus drove in
his sword and took it back dripping with death.
Rhoetus’ crimson life pumped out, a mix of blood
350 and wine. The Trojan pressed on eagerly,
Messapus’ allies his next target. He saw
the outer fires dead, and tethered horses cropping
280

grass. But Nisus sensed his friend was lost
to lust for slaughter. He said briefly, “Let’s go. Dawn,
no friend of ours, is near. Enough revenge.
We’ve hacked a passage through the enemy.”
They left behind many solid silver weapons,
also bowls and gorgeous rugs. Euryalus
took Rhamnes’ breastplate and gold-studded sword-belt,
360 gifts that rich King Caedicus once sent to
Remulus of Tibur, his distant guest-friend.
In death, Remulus bequeathed them to his grandson.
With his death, the Rutulians took his war-spoils.
Euryalus put these on his sturdy shoulders
(they wouldn’t save him) with Messapus’ strong helmet
and fine crest. They left the camp, making for safety.

Just now horsemen chanced to come from Latium:
Volcens led three hundred armed with shields.
They were bringing Turnus a response
370 while the army waited, drawn up in the fields.
As they neared the camp’s defenses, they saw
these two veering left, far off. In the predawn
gloom, Euryalus’ helmet mirrored
the moon’s rays and betrayed the thoughtless boy.
Taking note, Volcens shouted from the ranks:
“Halt! Why are you on the road? Why armed?
Where are you going?” The two made no reply,
but ran still faster to the woods, trusting to
the dark. The horsemen blocked the roads—they knew
380 them well—and set guards at the exits. The woods
281

bristled far and wide with thickets and black
holm-oaks; dense brambles clustered all around.
A narrow passage glimmered through the shrouded paths.
The forest’s darkness and his heavy plunder slowed
Euryalus, and his fear misled him.
But Nisus had escaped the troops in a blind rush,
past a spot later called Alban (after Alba,
where Latinus had his stables). He stopped then,
looking for his missing friend in vain.
390 “Poor Euryalus, where did I lose you? Which way
should I go?” He traced back every winding trail
of that tricky forest, looking for his tracks,
wandering through the silent brush. He heard
horses and a hubbub, proof of the pursuers.
It wasn’t long till shouting reached his ears
and he saw Euryalus, tricked by night
and forest and the sudden skirmish, struggling wildly
as the troop of horsemen dragged him off.
What should he do? How could he save the boy?
400 Should he throw himself at them, though doomed,
and die a noble death among their swords?
Quickly he drew back his arm to hurl his spear,
looking up at the high moon and praying,
“You, goddess, Latona’s daughter, glory
of the stars and guardian of the woods, help me
in my trouble. If my father brought your altars
gifts from me, if I offered wild game from
my hunts and hung them from your dome and sacred roof,
guide my spear, let me break apart their band.”
410 He hurled his weapon, using all his strength.
The flying shaft severed night’s shadow.
282

It struck Sulmo’s back and snapped, piercing
his heart with shattered wood. He slumped to earth.
Warm streams pumped from his chest and long convulsions
shook him; he grew cold. The group stared round.
Nisus, fiercer still, wielded a new spear
by his ear. He hurled the hissing weapon
at the panicked men. It went through Tagus’ temples,
sticking there, warming in his punctured brain.
420 Savage Volcens raged, but couldn’t see who threw
the spear, nor where to aim his furious attack.
Instead he turned his bare blade on Euryalus
and said, “You will pay me with hot blood
for both my men!” At this Nisus, insane
with terror, no longer hiding in the dark, unable
to endure such pain, called out, “It’s me,
me, Rutulians, I did it, turn your swords
on me! I attacked you! He didn’t, couldn’t,
dare it: I swear by the sky and knowing stars.
430 He just loved his wretched friend too much.”
But as he spoke, the sword plunged violently
through Euryalus’ ribs, ripping open
his white chest. He crumpled, dying. Blood
ran down his lovely body; his neck slumped
like a purple flower cut down by a plow,
bending as it dies, like a poppy’s drooping
neck when heavy rain drags down its head.
Nisus rushed at them. But among them all,
he aimed for Volcens only, took time for him alone.
440 The soldiers crowded him, jabbing with spears
to drive him off. He fought on still. His sword
283

swung round like lightning till he shoved it into
Volcens’ shouting face. He killed him and died,
pierced through and through, flinging himself
on his friend’s corpse, finding peace at last in death.
Lucky pair! If my song has any power,
no day will steal you from time’s memory,* while
Aeneas’ people settle by the Capitol’s
unmoving stone, and a Roman father rules.
450 The Rutulian victors took up their spoils.

In tears, they carried Volcens’ body back to camp.
Their grief was not reduced by bloodless Rhamnes
near the tents, by Serranus, Numa, and
so many leaders killed together. They rushed
as one to the dead and dying men. The ground
was warm with gore and streams of foaming blood.
The spoils were recognized: Messapus’ gleaming helmet
and his breastplate’s emblems, re-won with so much sweat.
Dawn was sprinkling new light on the lands,
460 rising early from Tithonus’ saffron bed.
As sunlight soaked the world and laid it bare,
Turnus armed himself and roused his men to fight.
Each chief marshaled his bronze-armored ranks
for war, whetting their rage with varied rumors.
They stuck the heads of Nisus and Euryalus
on pikes held high, heart-rending to see,
and marched behind them with loud battle-cries.
Aeneas’ hardened men stationed their front lines
to the ramparts’ left (the right side touched the river),
284

470 guarding the deep ditches, or sadly manning

the high turrets—heartsick at the impaled heads,
oozing with black blood, of men they knew so well.
Winged Rumor flew across the anxious camp
and stole into the ears of the dead boy’s mother.
At once warmth left her bones, poor thing. The shuttle
tumbled from her hands, its wool unwinding.
She leapt up in agony and tore her hair,
shrilling in a woman’s grief, madly running
for the ramparts and front guard, forgetting soldiers,
480 spears, and danger, pouring pain into the sky.
“Is this you, Euryalus? Is this the comfort
kept for my old age? My cruel son, you left me?
Sent off to such danger, you didn’t pause to say
goodbye to your unhappy mother? Now you’re dead,
carrion for Latin dogs and birds
in a foreign land. I can’t take your body
to the pyre, close your eyes, and wash your wounds,
or warm you with the robe I’d woven day and night,
racing time, the shuttle soothing my old years.
490 Where can I go? What place has your severed,
mangled corpse? This head is all you’ve left me,
son? This is what I followed over land and
sea? Rutulians, show your piety—
throw your weapons at me, kill me first.
Or you, great father of the gods, take pity,
use your bolt to plunge my hateful soul to Hades,
if that’s the only way this bitter life can end.”
They were stricken at her cries. A sad groan ran
through all of them; their strength for battle drained.
285

500 She was stirring too much grief. Ilioneus

and weeping Iülus ordered Actor and Idaeus
to carry her inside and lay her down.
The trumpet blared its terrible bronze notes
from far. A shout went up, the heavens bellowed back.
The Volscians raced up under overlapping shields,
keen to fill the ditches and tear down the walls.
Some tried to breach the camp, leaning ladders on the
walls where the ranks were thin, where the ring
of soldiers showed a gap. But long war had taught
510 the Trojans how to defend walls. They rained down
varied missiles, dislodging men with sturdy pikes,
rolling rocks of deadly weight, eager to break
through to the protected ranks. The Latins, huddling
under their locked shields, took pleasure in their safety.
But this was not enough, since the Trojans dropped
a giant boulder where the hostile throng
was thickest. It sent Rutulians flying far and wide,
breaking their roof of shields. The bold Rutulians
had no wish to keep on fighting blindly.
520 Instead they tried to clear the walls by hurling spears.
Elsewhere, grim to see, Mezentius brandished
torches made of Tuscan pine, hurling smoky fire,
while Neptune’s son, Messapus the horse-tamer,
tore at the defenses and demanded ladders.
Calliope, I pray you and your sisters: inspire
me to sing of all the carnage there, the deaths
dispensed by Turnus, the killers and the victims.
Unroll with me the length and breadth of war.*
286

A turret with high gangways towered near
530 the camp, a vital spot which the Italians
tried with all their strength to storm and topple.
The Trojans fought to save it, crowding by
the open oylets to fling stones and spears.
Turnus was the first to hurl a burning torch.
The flame clung to the wall. Fanned by wind,
it consumed the planks and climbed the beams.
Inside, chaos and terror. Soldiers frantic to get
out were trapped. They retreated in a huddle
540 to the safer side. Suddenly, the tower
caved under their weight. The sky roared with the crash.
Half-dead men rained down, and the huge fort followed,
impaling them with weapons and hard timbers.
Only Helenor and Lycus made it out.
Helenor was in the prime of life, a bastard
son the Lydian king had sired on a slave,
Licymnia. Although it was forbidden,* he fought
in battle, with just a sword and unmarked shield.
When he found himself among Turnus’s
550 thousands, the Latin legions all around,
he was like a wild beast close-ringed by hunters,
raging at their weapons, courting death
on purpose, leaping onto their tall spears;
just so, about to die, he flung himself
where he saw the hostile spear-tips thickest.
Swift Lycus sprinted through the swords and men
and reached the walls. He scrabbled for the top,
stretching up to grasp his comrades’ hands.
But Turnus had kept up, armed and right behind him.
560 Catching him, he chided, “Fool, you thought
287

you could escape my grasp?” He seized him as he dangled,
and pulled a huge chunk of the wall away with him—
like Jove’s lightning-carrier, the eagle, who grabs
a hare or snowy swan in his hooks, then soars;
or like a wolf, Mars’ beast, stealing a lamb
out of the fold as its mother searches, bleating.
The Latins charged with war-cries; they filled the ditches
and flung flaming torches on the roofs.
With a giant rock, Ileoneus killed
570 Lucetius as he neared the gate with firebrands.
Liger, good with lances, killed Emathion.
Asilas’ arrow, unseen, brought down Coryneus
from afar. Turnus slaughtered Caeneus (who’d killed
Ortygius), Itys, Dioxippus,
Clonius, Promolus, Sagaris,
and Idas on the turret. Capys killed Privernus,
whom Themillas’ spear had grazed—the fool dropped his
shield to clutch his wound; the gliding arrow pierced him
on the left and tunneled deep, tearing
580 the pathways of his breath, a lethal wound.
Arcens’ son was close in striking armor
and an embroidered cloak, bright with Spanish red:
a handsome boy sent by his father, who had
raised him in Mars’ grove, near Symaethus’ streams,
where Palicus has altars with rich offerings.
Mezentius threw down his spears, whirled a hissing
sling three times around his head, and threw.
He split open the boy’s forehead with hot
lead and sprawled him on a sandbank, dead.
590 It’s said this was the first time that Ascanius

288

let arrows fly in war. Before, he’d only scared
the skittish wild beasts. His strong hand killed
Numanus Remulus, now Turnus’ kin—
he’d married Turnus’ younger sister. This man strode
in front of the battle-line, shouting abuse,
not all fit to tell, swollen up with
his new kingdom, strutting his bulk around:
“Twice-beaten Phrygians! You’re not ashamed to hide
behind ramparts again, delaying death with walls?
600 See these types who’d seize our wives in war!
What god, what lunacy drove you to Italy?
There are no sons of Atreus here, no lying
Ulysses. We’re a flinty race. We take our newborns
to the streams and steel them in the icy water.
Our sons stay up to hunt, wearing out the woods.
Their play is breaking colts and shooting arrows.
Our men don’t tire of work. They live off little;
they tame the earth with hoes, they humble towns in war.
Spears shape our lives—we use their butts
610 to drive our oxen! Slow old age can’t sap
our bravery nor mute our vigor. We hide
our gray hair with a helmet, and never stop
collecting spoils to live on. But you! Your clothes
have violet and saffron stitching,* your hobby’s
laziness, you love to dance, your tunics
have long sleeves and your hats are bonnets!
O Phrygian ladies (no men here), go prance over
Mount Dindyma’s ridge, where the double flute plays
your sort of tunes. Your tambourines and Mother Ida’s
620 boxwoods call you. Leave the weapons to real men.”

289

Ascanius had had enough of this man’s boasts
and threats. He pulled his horsehair bowstring
to its tautest point and stood, aiming his arrow,
beseeching Jupiter with many prayers.
“Almighty Jove, approve my daring act.
I’ll bring offerings to your temple every year,
and I’ll set a snowy calf before your altar.
He’ll hold his gilded forehead as high as his mother’s,
butting with his horns and pawing at the sand.”
630 The Father heard. He thundered on the left
in the cloudless sky. The deadly bowstring twanged.
A taut arrow sprang out, hissing horribly,
and pierced Remulus’s head, driving through
the hollow temples with its iron. Ascanius
said curtly: “Now use haughty words to mock our courage!
Here’s how twice-beaten Phrygians answer you.”
The Trojans shouted gladly; their spirits soared sky-high.
It happened that long-haired Apollo, seated on
a lofty cloud, was watching the Italian army
640 and the camp. He said to the victor Iülus:
“Bravo, my son. Your first brave deed, the pathway
to the stars. Born of gods, you’ll father gods.
Under Assaracus’ race, all wars will cease
—it’s fated. Troy will be eclipsed.” He sprang down
from the heights of heaven, parting airy winds,
and found Ascanius. First he took on aged
Butes’ face, a man who’d been the armor-bearer
for Anchises long ago, a trusty guard;
Aeneas gave him as a tutor to his son.
650 Apollo mirrored the old man in every way,
290

his voice and color, white hair, jangling armor.
He said to Iülus, who was hot for battle:
“It’s enough, Aeneas’ son, that you shot
Numanus with impunity. Great Apollo
grants you this first glory. He’s not jealous
that you too use a bow. But avoid the rest
of battle.” He spoke and shed his human form,
slipping from their mortal eyes into thin air.
The Trojan leaders knew the god and his immortal
660 weapons; they heard his quiver clatter as he flew.
At Apollo’s words and will, they restrained
Ascanius, who hungered for the fight. The rest
returned to battle and the open risk of death.
The clamor rang along the walls and towers
as they drew their bows and whirled their slings.
All the ground was strewn with spears; their shields
and hollow helmets clashed and clanged. The fighting
surged like rain out of the west, lashing earth
when watery Auriga rises; like a storm
670 that pelts thick hail into the waves, when south winds
freeze the rain and burst the hollow clouds.
Pandarus and Bitias, Alcanor’s sons,
whom the nymph Iaera reared in Jove’s groves,
men tall as pine-trees on their native hills,
threw open the gate they guarded, trusting
to their swords, inviting in the enemy.
They stood like towers to the right and left,
armed in iron, high plumes rippling on their heads:
like twin oaks soaring to the sky by clear waters
680 on Po’s banks or near pleasant Athesis,
291

raising their unshorn heads to heaven; the tall
crowns bob up and down. The Rutulians
saw the open gates and charged at once.
But their men—led by Quercens and
Aquiculus, handsome in his armor, reckless
Tmarus, and Haemon, son of Mars—all died
at the very gates, or turned to run.
Now rage surged in both sides’ hating hearts.
The Trojans massed together, daring combat
690 hand to hand and sallying beyond the gate.
As he rampaged elsewhere, causing chaos, Turnus
heard the news: a fever for fresh slaughter gripped
the enemy, they’d put their open gates on show!
He stopped what he’d begun. Wild rage drove him
to the gates where the proud brothers stood.
First he speared Antiphates, fighting at
the front, Sarpedon’s bastard by a Theban
mother. The shaft of native cornel flew through
the thin air and speared him in the stomach,
700 just under his chest. The gaping hole spewed out
a bloody froth; the iron grew warm inside his lung.
Then Turnus slaughtered Erymas and Merops
and Aphidnus. Bitias died next, roaring,
his eyes blazing. But not by a spear (he’d never
die by spear). A shrieking Saguntine pike
sped his way like lightning. The shield of two bull’s-hides,
the trusty breastplate with its double golden scales,
couldn’t block it. His huge body crumpled, falling
to the groaning earth; the giant shield crashed
710 above him—like the shore at Baiae when
292

a pier of giant rocks collapses in the sea,
crashing in a pile of wreckage as it hits
the shallow bottom, making the sea churn. Black sand
swirls up and nearby islands tremble at the sound,
soaring Prochtya and Inarime, a hard bed
piled on Typhoeus by Jupiter’s command.
Now Mars, lord of war, gave strength and courage
to the Latins, twisting his sharp spurs inside
their chests, dealing Flight and black Fear to the Trojans.
720 Latins swarmed from all around to seize
their chance. The god of battle goaded them.
Pandarus saw his brother’s corpse, saw how
their fortune stood, how disaster drove the day.
He pushed against the gate with massive shoulders
and strained to turn it on its hinges, stranding many
of his men beyond the walls in bitter war.
The rest he shut in with him as they bolted through—
the fool, who didn’t realize the Rutulian king
was in the crowd, and locked him in the city,
730 like a hulking tiger among helpless sheep.
Fresh fire flashed in Turnus’ eyes, and his weapons
rang out horribly. His helmet’s blood-red plumes shook;
lightning glimmered from his shield. Shocked,
Aeneas’ men saw suddenly that hated face,
that massive frame. Huge Pandarus leapt in front,
boiling with rage at his brother’s death. He shouted,
“This is not your promised dowry, queen Amata’s
palace! These are not the coddling walls of your
town Ardea! It’s a hostile camp—you’re trapped!”
740 Turnus smiled at him and answered calmly, “Come, then,
293

if your heart has any courage, fight with me:
tell Priam you found Achilles here too.”
Pandarus threw his spear, rough with whorls
and bark, with all his strength. But the breezes took it,
and Saturnian Juno bent away the wound
it brought. The shaft stuck in the gate, and Turnus cried:
“You won’t escape this weapon, nor the power that’s
behind it. The man who throws it gives no second chances.”
Rearing high, he raised his sword and halved Pandarus’
750 head right down the center with the blade. The temples
and smooth cheeks were sliced in two, a monstrous wound.
With a thud, that massive weight crashed to the ground.
In death, he spilled onto the dirt his fallen body
and the armor dripping brains. His head,
split down the middle, hung over each shoulder.
Terrified, the Trojans turned and scattered;
and if the victor had thought then to smash
the locks and let his allies in, that would
have been the end of war—and of the Trojans.
760 But frenzy and an insane lust for slaughter drove him
blazing at his enemies. Phaleris
was killed, Gyges’ hamstrings cut. He seized
spears and hurled them at the fleeing Trojans
(Juno gave him bravery and strength); then sent
Halys to the dead, then Phegeus, his shield
pierced; then Halius, Alcander, Noëmon
and Prytanis, caught off guard as they cheered
men from the walls. Lynceus attacked, calling
on his friends, but by the right-hand rampart Turnus
770 slashed him first, one strike of his flashing sword.
294

His severed head and helmet landed far away.
Next fell Amycus, slayer of beasts, best at
smearing arrow-tips and arming spears with poison,
and Clytius, Aeolus’ son, and Cretheus,
the Muses’ friend and follower, who always loved
the lyre and songs and setting verse to music;
he always sang of horses, war, battles, and men.*
At last the Trojan leaders heard news of the bloodbath.
Fierce Serestus and Mnestheus both ran up
780 to see the Trojans scattered, the enemy inside.
Mnestheus shouted: “Are you running? But where to?
What other walls or camps do you have? Citizens,
will a single man, fenced in by your ramparts,
deal death through our quarters unopposed,
and send the best of our young men to Orcus?
Cowards! Where’s your shame and pity for your
suffering land, your ancient gods, and great Aeneas?”
These words fired them with courage. They joined up
to hold the line. Meanwhile Turnus edged back from
790 the fighting, aiming for a spot next to the river.
Now the Trojans fell on him more fiercely,
massing round him with loud yells—like a band
of hunters cornering a savage lion with spears.
He’s afraid, but hate is in his eyes as he
retreats. Rage and nerve won’t let him turn his back;
he longs to spring, but balks at men and weapons.
So Turnus fell back slowly, hesitating,
his mind seething with rage. Twice he charged
into their ranks, disrupting them, and pushed
295

800 the Trojans back against the walls, but they

quickly regrouped from the borders of the camp.
Juno, Saturn’s daughter, didn’t dare supply him
strength, since Jupiter had sent down Iris
from the sky to pass on his harsh threats
if Turnus didn’t leave the Trojan camp.
The fighter couldn’t hold his ground with shield
or sword. The spears heaped on him from every side
engulfed him, and his helmet rang around his head
with constant clangs. Flying stones had broken its hard
810 bronze and the crest had been knocked off. His shield
couldn’t stop the blows. Now thundering Mnestheus
and the Trojan soldiers multiplied the rain
of spears. His whole body ran with grimy streams
of sweat. He couldn’t breathe, and shook with gasps.
At last he leapt into the river, plunging in
headfirst with his armor. Its sandy currents welcomed
him and buoyed him with gentle waves. Rinsing
off the blood, it sent him, happy, to his friends.

296

BOOK 10

BLOODSHED, AND PALLAS DOWN

Now great Olympus’ palace was flung open.
The father of the gods and king of men convened
a council in that starry home, from whose heights
he saw all lands, the Trojan camps and Latin peoples.
When all were seated in the hall with double doors,
he began. “Great sky-gods, why this change
of heart, this bitter disagreement? My command
was that the Trojans and Italians should not fight.*
What’s this conflict, then? What fear caused
10 each side to take to war and weapons? The time
for fighting will arrive (don’t hasten it)
when fierce Carthage opens up the Alps*
to launch destruction on Rome’s citadel.
Then they can compete in hate and pillage.
For now, stop. Be allies gladly, as agreed.”
Jupiter spoke briefly, but golden Venus’s
response was far from brief. “Father, eternal
king of mankind and the world entire,
who else could I appeal to now? Don’t you see
20 how proudly the Rutulians strut, how boldly
Turnus gallops through the ranks, puffed up by

297

fresh victory? The Trojan camp no longer
offers safety. The fight’s within the very walls
and ramparts, the trenches overflow with blood!
Aeneas is away and doesn’t know. Will you
never let the siege be raised? Again
an army menaces the walls of a new Troy,
again Diomedes will attack the Trojans
from Greek Arpi. No doubt new wounds await me too
30 —your daughter, still harassed by human swords!*
If the Trojans came to Italy against
your will, let them expiate their error:
withhold your help. But if they followed many
oracles from gods and ghosts, how could anyone
overturn your orders now and alter fate?
Must I mention ships ablaze at Eryx,
the raging storms freed by the King of Winds,
or Iris on a mission from the clouds?
Now Juno even meddles with the dead,
40 the only realm she hadn’t touched—suddenly
Allecto runs amok in the Italian towns.
I no longer care for empires; I just had hope
while my luck stood. Your favorites can win.
If there’s no land your heartless wife will give
the Trojans, I beg you by Troy’s smoking ruins:
let me take Ascanius away from war
unharmed. Allow my grandson to survive.
Aeneas can be tossed on unknown seas,
following whatever path Fate gives.
50 Just let me save the boy from battle’s terrors.
I control Amathus, Cythera, high Paphus,
and a shrine in Cyprus: let him drop his sword
298

and lead an unheroic life there. Tell Carthage
to subdue Ausonia; Tyrian towns
can rise unhampered. What use was surviving
in a fatal war, surrounded by Greek flames,
and endless risks on land and sea, if they still lack
their Latium, their second Pergamum?
Better if they’d settled on the ashes
60 of their fatherland, the soil that was Troy.
Father, give back Simoïs and Xanthus,
let these wretched people live Troy’s fate again.”
Now deep rage stung Juno: “Why am I being forced
to shatter my long silence and lay bare old wounds?
Which god or man compelled Aeneas to choose war,
and make an enemy of King Latinus?
Fine, he came to Italy guided by fate
(or forced by mad Cassandra): did I urge
him to leave his camp and trust his life to winds?
70 To put his son in charge, rely on walls,
rile up Tuscan loyalties and peaceful clans?
Which god drove him to deceit? What harshness
of mine? Where’s Juno here, or Iris from the sky?
If it’s dreadful that Italians circled
a new Troy with flames, or that Turnus (divine
Venilia’s son, Pilumnus’ heir) has made a stand
on his own land, what about the Trojans torching
Latium, seizing foreign fields and plunder?
Or choosing in-laws, stealing fiancées, seeking
80 peace with words while fixing shields on prows?
It was fine for you to snatch Aeneas from the
Greeks, to hide him in a hollow puff of cloud,
299

to turn a whole fleet into just as many nymphs:
but it’s an outrage if I’ve aided the Rutulians?
‘Aeneas is away and doesn’t know.’ So what?
You own Paphus, Cyprus, lofty Cythera:
Why attack fierce hearts and burden towns with war?
Am I trying to topple Troy’s unsteady rule?
Who threw the wretched Phrygians to the Greeks?
90 Europe and Asia rose in war and broke
their treaty—why? Who stole a woman? Was it
I who made the Trojan cheater storm and
capture Sparta, did I arm a lovers’ war?
Your concern was due back then. It’s too late now
for empty slander and unfair complaints.”
So Juno pled her case. All the sky-gods murmured
in favor of one goddess or the other, like the
early rustling of winds caught in forests—a hidden
murmur warning sailors of the storms to come.
100 Then the almighty father, ruler of all things,
began to speak. The gods’ high home fell silent,
the soil trembled underfoot. The heavens stilled,
the breezes died, the ocean waters settled.
“Listen, and take my words to heart. Since Troy
and Italy were not permitted to make peace,
and your quarrel knows no end, today
I won’t distinguish Trojans from Rutulians,
no matter what their luck or what their hopes,
whether it’s the fate of Italy that’s caused
110 this siege, or Trojan error and vicious advice.
The Rutulians are not absolved. Each side
will bear the consequence of their acts.
300

Royal Jove is neutral;* the fates will find their way.”
He swore this by his brother’s Stygian streams,
the banks bubbling with pitch, and the dark abyss.
Olympus staggered with his nod: all talk was done.
The gods saw him from his gold throne to the door.
Meanwhile the Rutulians crowded all the gates,
keen to kill their enemies and ring the camp
120 with flames. Aeneas’ troops were trapped inside the walls
with no hope of escape. Wretched, they stood
on the towers uselessly. Two Assarici,
Asius, Imbrasus’ son, and Thymoetes,
son to Hicetaon, took the front positions
with Castor and old Thymbris: the ramparts’ sparse defense.
Also Sarpedon’s brothers from great Lycia,
Clarus and Thaemon. Acmon of Lyrnesus,
huge as his father Clytius or brother Menestheus,
hoisted a huge boulder, the good part of a hill,
130 with great effort. Some tried to save the camp
with spears, some with stones and fire and arrows.
Among them was the Trojan boy, Venus’
special care, his noble head uncovered.
He shone like a jewel set in yellow gold,
a gem for neck or brow, or like bright ivory
set skillfully in terebinth or boxwood.
His hair spilled down his milky neck, over
the circling choker of soft gold. You too,
Ismarus: your great-souled people saw you
140 aiming shots, arrows that you’d armed with poison,
noble son of Lydia, where farmers plow
rich fields watered with Pactolus’s gold dust.
301

Mnestheus was there too, raised sky-high by glory
from the day before, when he’d beaten Turnus
from the walls; and Capys, who’d name Capua.
So they fought, in the bitter strife of war.
But in the dead of night, Aeneas left Evander,
sailing for the camp of the Etruscan king.
He explained his name and race, his needs and
150 assets, and pled with him, warning that
Mezentius was gaining allies, Turnus called for
violence, and his own plans might someday
fall apart. At once, Tarchon struck a pact
and gave him men, paying Lydia’s debt
to gods and fate. They sailed with a foreigner
as leader. Aeneas was in front, his ship’s beak
carved with Phrygian lions in Mount Ida’s
shadow, a sweet sight for Trojan exiles.
He sat there thinking of the varied phases
160 of the war. Close at his left, Pallas asked
about the stars, their guides through the inky night,
then about his sufferings on land and sea.
Muses, open Helicon, inspire my song.
Tell me of the troops Aeneas took from Tuscan
shores to man the ships and sail the sea.
Massicus led. His bronze ship Tiger cut the waves,
a thousand of his men on board. They’d left
walled Clusium and Cosae, land of arrows,
lightweight quivers and bows dealing death.
170 With him was grim Abas, his men in striking
302

armor, a gold Apollo gleaming on his stern.
His native Populonia had given him
six hundred veterans. The island Ilva, dotted
with rich iron mines, sent three hundred more.
In third place was Asilas, seer of men and gods.
He read bulls’ entrails and the stars above,
the speech of birds and lightning’s fiery omens. He brought
a thousand men, thickset ranks of bristling spears.
Pisa, Tuscan offshoot of Alphean Pisa,
180 sent them to follow him. Then came handsome
Astyr, trusting in his horse and varicolored
armor. Three hundred more were sent, all keen
to join, from round the river Minio and Caere,
from ancient Pyrgi and Graviscae, land of fevers.
Cunarus, bravest leader of the Lydians,
I won’t pass you by, nor you, Cupavo, followed
by a few. Your helmet’s swan-plumes honored Cycnus—
your father, changed into a swan by Venus and
her son. They say he mourned his lover, Phaëthon,
190 under leafy poplars that were once his sisters,
finding comfort for grief in the Muse of song.
As he sang, he grew the downy plumes of white
old age, left the earth, and soared up to the stars.
His son drove forward the huge Centaur, leading
young men like himself. Its half-horse figurehead
loomed high above, threatening to throw a rock
into the waves. The long keel plowed deep ocean.
Ocnus mustered soldiers from his native banks,
son of the seer Manto and the Tuscan river.
303

200 He gave Mantua walls, and his mother’s name—

Mantua, rich in different ancestors,
a city with three races and four clans in each.
Her strength came from Tuscan blood. Here, hatred
for Mezentius propelled five hundred into
war. The river Mincius, Benacus’ son,
was their warships’ figurehead, veiled in gray-green
reeds. Next, Aulestes led the heavy Triton,
a hundred oars rising to thrash the waves
and roil the marble surface of the sea.
210 Triton’s statue scared the blue sea with his conch,
to his waist a hairy man, a fish below.
Waves churned and roared under the hybrid’s chest.
So many chosen princes came on thirty ships
to fight for Troy. Their bronze beaks cut the briny plains.
Now day had slipped from sky, and kindly Phoebe
trampled high Olympus with her nightly horses.
Aeneas (since his cares gave him no rest)
held the helm himself, tending to the sails.
Suddenly, far out to sea, a band of friends
220 appeared: the nymphs whom kind Cybele
had changed from ships into sea-goddesses.
A line of them cut through the waves, a number
equal to the prows that once were moored at shore.
They recognized the king from far, and circled him
in dance. Cymodocea, most skilled in speech,
held the stern with one hand, paddling softly under
water with the other, rising from the surface.
She asked confused Aeneas, “Are you keeping watch,
Aeneas, born of gods? Wake up, let out the sails.
304

230 We’re the pines from Ida’s sacred peak, once

your fleet—now ocean nymphs. When lying Turnus
rushed at us with flames and swords, we broke your ropes
unwillingly. Now we search for you at sea,
since Cybele pitied us and changed our form;
she made us goddesses that live under the waves.
Young Ascanius is trapped by walls and trenches,
besieged by spears and Latins barbed for war.
Arcadian horsemen hold their posts along with strong
Etruscans. But Turnus plans to send his central column
240 to stop their union with the Trojan camp.
Rise with the dawn, and quickly call your men
to arms. Take the deathless shield the Fire God
himself ringed with gold and gave to you.
If you trust my words, tomorrow’s sun will see
huge heaps of dead Rutulians.” As she left,
she pushed the high stern with her hand (she knew
the ways of boats). The ship flew across the waves,
quicker than a spear or wind-swift arrow.
The whole fleet sped up too. Anchises’ Trojan son,
250 baffled, awestruck, took heart at the omen.
Gazing at the vault of sky, he briefly prayed:
“Kind Cybele, mother of the gods, to whom
Mount Dindyma and towered towns and harnessed
lions are dear, guide me now in battle, make this
omen good, and help your Trojans, goddess.”
The full light of the wheeling day was rushing in
to rout the night already. Right away
Aeneas told his troops to rally round
the standards and to brace their hearts for war.

305

260 And now, as he stood on the high stern, he spied

the Trojans and their camp. He raised his blazing shield.
The soldiers on the wall raised a war-shout
to the stars; fresh hope spurred their rage.
Their spears flew—like cranes leaving the river Strymon
under storm-clouds, honking as they skim the air,
raucous with delight at fleeing the south wind.
The Italian chiefs and Turnus were surprised
until they turned to see a fleet nearing the shore,
a massive flood of ships converging on them.
270 Aeneas’ helmet flashed; a flame poured from its crest
and his shield’s golden boss shot fire,
like a glowing comet’s blood-red tail, deathly
in the clear night; or scorching Sirius,
bringer of disease and drought to feeble mortals,
souring the night sky with unlucky light.
Yet bold Turnus was no less convinced
that he could hold the shore and block the ships.
He raised his men’s spirits—and added a rebuke:*
“You have your wish—to break the Trojans’ strength!
280 The god of battle’s in your hands. Remember now
your wives and homes, the great deeds of the past,
and our fathers’ glory. Let’s catch them on the beach
while they’re afraid, while their first steps totter
on the gangways. Fortune helps the brave.”
He decided whom to take with him to fight,
and whom to trust with the blockaded camp.
Meanwhile, Aeneas’ soldiers disembarked from
the high ships. Many waited for the surf
306

to ebb and weaken, then leapt into shallow water;
290 others rowed. Tarchon scouted out the shore,
avoiding shoals where breaking waves crashed loudly,
seeing where swells gently lapped the land.
He quickly pointed his prow there and asked the crew:
“Bend to oars, my chosen band; drive
your boats ahead, let the ships’ beaks gouge
this hostile land, let your keels furrow it!
No matter if this mooring breaks our fleet apart,
as long as we make land.” Tarchon spoke;
his crews surged to the oars. They drove the foam-flecked
300 ships onto the Latin shore until the beaks
were rammed into dry earth, and the keels
were beached and safe—Tarchon, all but yours,
which smashed into the shoals. For a while it tilted
back and forth, wedged on a jutting sandbar, battered
by the waves, then broke. The crew spilled out into
the sea—hampered by the splintered oars and floating
benches and an ebb-tow pulling at their feet.
No hesitation held back fierce Turnus. He threw
his front line at the Trojans. All clashed on the shore.
310 The bugles sang. Aeneas was the first to wade
into the throng of farmers (a good omen),
cutting Latins down, killing giant Theron
as he charged. His sword sliced Theron’s gold-scaled
tunic and the chain mail made of bronze.
It gashed his flank and drank his blood. Lichas was next,
sacred to Apollo, cut from his dead mother.
The child escaped the blade—but to what end?
Soon he killed hard Cisseus and massive Gyas
307

as they clubbed the hordes. Hercules’s weapon
320 didn’t help, nor strong hands, nor their father,
Melampus, Alcides’ friend while earth served him
hard tasks. As Pharus boasted uselessly,
a whirling spear wedged in his blabbing mouth.
You too, luckless Cydon: you’d have fallen
by that Trojan hand as you trailed Clytius,
your new passion. You’d be free of your eternal
love of boys as you lay there, pitiful.
But your brothers, Phorcus’ sons, stopped Aeneas:
seven sons with seven hurtling spears.
330 Some glanced off his shield and helmet uselessly,
some kind Venus turned aside, so they only
grazed him. Aeneas called to loyal Achates:
“Bring the spears we pulled from Greeks I killed
at Troy. Not one I throw at the Rutulians
will miss its mark!” Grabbing a huge shaft,
he let it fly. It pierced Maeon’s shield of bronze,
ripping open chest and breastplate in one go.
His brother Alcanor rushed up to catch him,
stretching out his hands, but a spear severed
340 his right arm and kept on flying, trailing blood;
the dead limb dangled from the shoulder by the sinews.
Another brother, Numitor, wrenched the spear
from Maeon’s corpse, but failed to strike Aeneas
with it. He merely grazed mighty Achates’ thigh.
Now Clausus of Cures, bold in his young strength,
hurled a spear that hit Dryops in mid-sentence.
It entered below the chin and tore his throat,
stripping him of voice and life together. He retched
308

thick blood and fell, his forehead thudding on the earth.
350 Next Clausus killed three Thracians of Boreas’ noble
race, then three men from Ismara, sent by their
father Idas—different deaths for each. Halaesus
and a party of Auruncans charged with Neptune’s
famous son Messapus, who excelled with horses.
One side, then the other, tried to rout
the enemy, right at Italy’s doorstep. Like winds
fighting in the sky, as they clash with equal
force and spirit—not one yields, nor will the clouds
and sea; the battle’s balanced in a violent lock:
360 so the Trojan ranks clashed with the Latin,
feet treading on feet, men crushing men.
Elsewhere, a stream in flood had strewn the ground
with tumbled rocks and trees torn from its banks.
The rugged, wet terrain forced Pallas’ horsemen
to dismount, and they fled before a Latin
charge, unused to being on foot. When Pallas saw,
he summoned despair’s last resort, and fired
their bravery with pleas and bitter words.
“You’re retreating, friends? To where? By your brave acts,
370 by King Evander’s name, by wars you’ve won,
by my hopes to match my father’s fame, don’t trust
this path. Our swords must slash a passage through
their ranks. Your noble country calls you
to the thick of battle, and me with you.
The gods are not against us; we’re humans chased by
humans. We all have one soul, two hands. Look,
Ocean circles us, an endless obstacle.
Land’s gone. Will you pick the Trojan camp, or sea?”
309

He spoke and charged at the packed enemy.
380 A cruel fate drew Lagus to confront him first.

As he tried to hoist a massive boulder, Pallas
pierced him with his whirling spear, where the ribs
meet spine. Pallas worked to free the shaft stuck in
the bone, and Hisbo hoped to catch him bending
and off guard. But Hisbo’s fury at his friend’s
cruel death distracted him. Pallas was quicker.
He plunged his sword in Hisbo’s rageful lungs.
Next was Sthenius, then Anchemolus, Rhoeteus’
kin, who’d dared seduce his father’s wife.

390 You too, twins Larides and Thymber, Daucus’ sons,

each other’s mirror, fell in the Rutulian fields,
once a source of sweet confusion to your parents.
But Pallas gave you now a cruel distinction.
Evander’s sword-blade hacked off Thymber’s head
while Laridus’ lopped hand searched for its arm,
the dying fingers spasming on the hilt.
The sight of Pallas’ dazzling acts, and angry shame
at his rebuke, armed the Arcadians anew.
Now Pallas pierced Rhoeteus as his chariot
400 sped past. This gave space and time to Ilus—
who’d been the distant target of that heavy spear.
Rhoeteus had been on the run from Teuthras and his
brother Tyres. As he died, he dangled from his
chariot, his heels hitting Rutulian soil.
Like fires that a shepherd lights in summer, at first
310

spaced through the woods; then, as hoped, the winds
arise and light the gaps, so a single jagged
burning line extends across broad fields; he sits
and gazes at the dancing flames in triumph—like this
410 his courageous comrades now united to help
Pallas. Then Halaesus, fierce fighter, charged them,
huddling in his shield’s shelter. He killed Ladon,
Pheres, and Demodocus, and lopped off
Strymonius’ right hand with his gleaming blade
as it grabbed his throat. Then he took a rock
and bashed in Thoas’ face, spraying bone and blood
and brain. Halaesus’ father, knowing fate, once hid him
in the woods, but when death closed the father’s clouded
eyes, the Fates seized his son and sacrificed him
420 to Evander’s spear. Pallas rushed him, praying:
“Father Tiber, give my spear good luck—
and a path through hard Halaesus’ chest.
Your oak will get his armor and his spoils.” The god
heard. While poor Halaesus shielded Imaon,
Pallas’ spear found his unprotected chest.
But Lausus, no small part of battle,* wouldn’t let
the scope of Pallas’ slaughter terrify the troops.
First he butchered Abas, that bulwark of war.
Then Etruscans died, and Arcadia’s prime,
430 and Trojan soldiers who’d survived the Greeks.
The front lines clashed, matched in strength and leaders.
The rear guard crowded them, and the crush
hampered their hands and swords. On one side
Pallas urged them on, on the other, Lausus.
These two were close in age, both handsome, both
311

robbed of homecoming by fate. But the king of
high Olympus didn’t let them face each other.
A greater adversary would soon seal their fate.
Kind Juturna, Turnus’ sister, urged him to help
440 Lausus. He cut through the lines with his swift chariot.
When he saw his men he shouted: “Stop the fighting!
It’s for me to confront Pallas; Pallas is mine.
I just wish his father could be here to see.”
The men cleared the field as told. When they left,
young Pallas, amazed by the proud command,
stared at Turnus from afar, and rolled his
fierce gaze across the man’s great frame.
This was his retort to the king’s words:
“I’ll win glory either way: by taking your rich
450 spoils or by a splendid death. My father’s
fine with both. Enough of threats.” He walked into
the open. Blood froze in Arcadian hearts.
Turnus leapt down from his chariot, ready
for close combat. He came on like a lion
who spies a distant bull snorting for war
from his high overlook, and flies down for the kill.
When Pallas thought his spear could reach Turnus,
he ran forward, hoping bravery would help
this mismatched duel, praying to the great sky:
460 “I beg you, Hercules, by my father’s welcome,
his feast for a stranger, help this great attempt.
Let Turnus see me ripping off his bloody armor
as he dies, let his dimming eyes fall on
his victor.” Alcides heard, and stifled a great
groan within his heart, shedding futile tears.
312

Jove his father spoke kind words to him: “The day
of death awaits all men; their time is brief and comes
just once. But they can prolong their fame by action.
This is the task of valor. Many sons of gods
470 were killed by Troy’s high walls; my son Sarpedon died
among them. Turnus too is called by fate.
The finish line of his allotted life is near.”
Jove spoke, and turned his eyes from the Rutulian fields.
Pallas flung his spear forcefully, then pulled
his gleaming sword out of its sheath. The spear
flew and hit the shield’s high rim, next to
Turnus’ shoulder, forcing a path through.
Now even that huge body felt a graze. Turnus
aimed his spear, with its sharp iron tip, at Pallas,
480 brandished it at length, and shouted: “See if
my spear penetrates a little better!”
The quivering shaft ran through the center of the shield,
through so many bronze and iron layers,
so many folds of overlapping bull-hide. It pierced
Pallas’ breastplate, boring into that great chest.
He tore the warm spear from the wound—it didn’t help.
As his soul and lifeblood spurted from that hole
together, he collapsed in his own blood. His weapons
clattered and he hit his bloody mouth on the
490 hard earth. Turnus towered over him and said:
“Arcadians, remember this, and tell Evander:
I return the Pallas he deserves. I’ll grant
whatever honor’s in a grave, whatever solace
comes from burial. But being Aeneas’ host
will not have proven cheap.” Bracing his left foot
313

against the corpse, he ripped away the massive weight
of Pallas’ sword-belt, carved to show a wicked crime:*
a band of husbands murdered in their bloody beds
on a single wedding night, worked by Clonus
500 with much gold. Turnus reveled in the spoils
he’d won. How blind the minds of men to fate
and future, to minding limits even in good luck!
There’d come a time when Turnus would wish
he’d left Pallas untouched. He’d hate this day, these spoils.
But a crowd of Pallas’ friends, with many groans
and tears, set him on his shield and took him home.
Ah, Pallas, you’ll bring grief and glory to your father!
You entered war and left it the same day, but still
you left behind huge heaps of the Rutulian dead.
510 A herald—no mere rumor of disaster—flew

to tell Aeneas his men were at the edge of death:
it was time to help the routed Trojans. Aeneas
mowed down those around him, slashing a wide pathway
through the fighters, on fire, hunting you, Turnus,
so proud of your fresh kill. In his mind
he saw young Pallas and Evander, their feast
for a stranger, and the pledge they’d made.
He took four of Sulmo’s sons alive,
and four that Ufens raised, to offer to Hell’s shades.
520 They’d splatter Pallas’ pyre with captive blood.*
Then, from far, he hurled his deadly spear at Magus,
who had the wit to duck the shaft as it flew over.
He clasped Aeneas’ knees in supplication:
“I beg you by your father’s ghost, your hopes in Iülus
as he grows: spare me for my son and father.
314

Buried deeply in my noble home are bars
of engraved silver and gold ingots, some carved,
some natural. The Trojan victory doesn’t turn
on this; a single soul won’t matter much.”
530 Aeneas countered with these words: “The many
bars of gold and silver that you speak of:
keep them for your sons. Turnus ended
barter in war when he murdered Pallas. So say
Iülus and the ghost of my father Anchises.”
Gripping Magus’ helmet in his hand, he bent
his neck back as he begged, and pushed in the sword.
Haemon’s son was nearby, priest of Diana and
Apollo, his head bound with sacred ribbons,
gleaming in white emblems and white robes.
540 He fled across the field, but fell. Aeneas
killed him and Death’s mighty darkness cloaked him.
Serestus carried back the armor as Mars’ trophy.
Caeculus, of Vulcan’s line, and Umbro,
from the Marsian hills, rallied the men.
The Trojan raged against them. He’d already
lopped off Anxur’s left arm with his sword,
the shield falling with it. Anxur had made wild boasts
and thought his strength would back them. Perhaps he dreamed
of fame reaching the stars, and white old age.
550 Tarquitus, the son of sylvan Faunus and the
nymph Dryope, showing off his gleaming armor,
blocked Aeneas’ blazing path. The Trojan pinned
Tarquitus’ shield to his breastplate with a spear
and struck his head off as he begged in vain,
searching for more words. Rolling over
315

the warm trunk, Aeneas said with hatred:
“Lie there now and scare us. No dear mother
will bury you in earth or pile a tomb on you.
You’ll be left to vultures, or the sea will take
560 your sodden corpse; hungry fish will suck your wounds.”
Then he chased down Turnus’ vanguard: Lucas and
Antaeus and brave Numa and blond Camers, son of
great-souled Volcens, richest landowner among
Ausonians, the king of quiet Amyclae.
As blood warmed his sword, Aeneas stormed
across the plain in triumph, like Aegaeon,*
said to have a hundred arms, a hundred hands,
and fifty fire-breathing mouths and chests;
when he clashed against Jove’s lightning bolts
570 he had fifty shields and swords. Now he rushed
Niphaeus’ four-horse chariot as it approached.
But the horses saw his giant strides and heard
his awful war-cry. They shied and bolted, spilling out
Niphaeus, and dragged the chariot to shore.
Lucagus, drawn by two white horses, charged Aeneas.
His brother Liger held the reins and steered
as Lucagus fiercely waved his unsheathed blade.
Aeneas could not tolerate this hot-headed
onrush. Huge, holding his spear, he ran to face them.
580 Liger shouted: “These are not the horses
of Diomedes! You don’t see Achilles’
chariot, or the Phrygian plains. Your life
and the war end here.” So the fool yapped loudly.
He received no answer. As Lucagus bent
to goad the horses with his sword, bracing
316

for the fight by planting forward his left leg,
Aeneas hurled his spear. It came tearing
through the bright shield’s lowest rim and ripped
through his left thigh. He tumbled from the chariot,
590 writhing on the ground as death came over him.
Pious Aeneas spoke these bitter words:
“Lucagus, your chariot was not betrayed
by skittish horses shying at mere shadows:
you leapt from the wheels and abandoned it.”
He seized the harness. Wretched Liger held out
helpless hands—he’d fallen from the chariot too:
“I beg you, by the parents who raised such a son,
Trojan hero, let me live, pity my prayers.”
But Aeneas said to these frantic pleas: “That’s not
600 how you spoke just now. Be loyal to your brother.
Die.” He opened up his chest, the soul’s dark home.
Such was the slaughter that Aeneas dealt across
the fields, raging like a torrent or black
whirlwind. At last his son Ascanius and
the men broke free of camp. The siege had failed.
Jupiter now came to talk to Juno. “Sister,
and most darling wife as well: as you thought
(and you were right), Venus is behind the Trojans’
strength—not just their hands so tireless in war,
610 not just their fierce souls inured to danger.”
Juno meekly answered: “Best of husbands, why
torment a feeble wife who fears your rebukes?
If my love had the force it used to once,
and ought to still, you who are all-powerful
would let me carry Turnus from the battle
317

and keep him unscathed for his father, Daunus.
But fine, let him die and pay the Trojans
with his pious blood. And yet he’s one of ours,
since Pilumnus was his ancestor. Turnus
620 has often heaped your shrine with lavish gifts.”
The king of high Olympus answered briefly:
“If you seek some time for your doomed prince
by a stay of death, and you accept my terms,
then rescue Turnus, snatch him from Fate’s tightening
noose: this much is allowed. But if some greater
favor lurks under your plea, if you want
the whole war changed, you feed on empty hopes.”
At this, Juno wept: “Why can’t you give me what
your words withhold, why can’t Turnus have his life?
630 Unless I’m wrong, an awful death awaits
a blameless man. How I wish false fear toyed
with me, and you’d change your plans—you can!”
She spoke, and swooped down from the sky, through
the breezes, wrapped in mist, bringing storms.
She reached the Trojan army and Laurentian camp.
Then she formed a weak and wraithlike shadow
from filmy cloud to be Aeneas’ look-alike
(a marvel!). She gave it Trojan armor, Aeneas’ shield,
the plumes over that godly head, his gait,
640 and hollow words, sounds without a meaning:
like phantoms said to hover after death,
or visions that deceive our sleeping senses.
The image pranced before the front lines happily,
taunting Turnus with rude shouts, flaunting weapons.
Turnus attacked, throwing his hissing spear
318

from afar. The shadow turned and ran.
Turnus thought the real Aeneas had turned tail.
In confusion, he clung to that empty thought.
“Where do you run, Aeneas? Don’t desert the wedding!
650 My blade will put you in the land for which you’ve sailed
the seas!” He chased him with such shouts, waving his drawn
sword, blind to how the winds dispersed his triumph.
The ship of King Osinius from Clusium
happened to be moored at a tall and rocky
outcrop, its ladders and gangplank lowered. Into its depths
plunged the anxious phantom of Aeneas
on the run; but Turnus, just as quick, was at
its heels, not pausing once. He leapt over the ramp.
But he’d hardly reached the prow when Juno broke
660 the hawser and the current whisked the boat away.
The flimsy shade no longer tried to hide,
but flew up and merged with the dark clouds.
On land, Aeneas called Turnus out to fight. Looking
for the missing man, he sent many down to death
as a stormwind carried Turnus out to sea.
Confused and ungrateful to be safe,
he gazed back and raised his voice and hands
up to the stars: “Almighty Father, did I merit
such disgrace? Did you choose this punishment?
670 Where am I going? How can I return, who will
I be, if they think I ran? Will I see
my walls again? Or those who followed me to war?
Have I left them to a ghastly death (the horror!),
do I see them routed, do I hear their dying
groans? What should I do? What pit could open
319

deep enough for me? Show me pity, winds:
smash this boat against the rocky cliffs,
Turnus begs you. Drive me onto savage reefs
where no Rutulian can follow, nor my shame.”
680 And now he wavered first this way, then that:
should he fall upon his sword, mad with
his disgrace, and drive the raw blade through his ribs,
or throw himself into the waves to strike out
for the curving shore and Trojans’ spears again?
He tried both paths three times; three times great Juno
held him back, taking pity on him. Fair winds
and favoring tides carried the boat. It cut the waves
and reached his father Daunus’ ancient city.
But now fiery Mezentius joined the fight
690 at Jove’s command. As he charged the joyful Trojans,
Etruscan ranks surrounded him, raining
hatred and their weapons on a single man.
He was like a headland jutting out to sea,
facing the winds’ fury, exposed to the waves,
bearing all the raging threats of sky and sea
unmoved. He hacked down Hebrus, Dolichaon’s son,
and with him Latagus, and Palmus as he turned
to run. He smashed Latagus’ face with a rock
torn from the cliff, then sliced through Palmus’ hamstrings,
700 leaving him writhing weakly. He gave Lausus
Palmus’ armor and his crest to wear. Next fell
Trojan Evanthes, then Paris’ friend and age-mate
Mimas, son of Amycus and Theano,
born the night Queen Hecuba had Paris—
she was pregnant with Troy’s future flames.
320

Paris lies in his paternal city, but Mimas
sprawls unknown on the Laurentian shore.
Like a boar protected many years
by Vesulus’s pines or the Laurentian swamps’
710 reed forest—once chased from the heights by snapping dogs
and trapped in nets it takes a stand, snorting rage,
hackles raised, and no one dares to make the kill;
men attack with shouts and spears, safely distant,
while it slowly circles to attack, fearless,
gnashing teeth, shaking spears off its back;
just so, all the soldiers justly angry
at Mezentius didn’t dare close combat.
They harried him from far with spears and shouting.
A Greek named Acron had arrived from ancient
720 Corythus, an exile, his marriage unfulfilled.
Far off, Mezentius saw him in the thick of battle,
wearing purple clothes, the gift of his betrothed.
Like an unfed lion prowling through high lairs,
driven mad by hunger, happy if he sees
a fleeing goat or young buck breaking in his horns;
then he crouches, huge jaws gaping, mane on end,
feeding on the entrails, letting stinking gore
rinse out his cruel mouth—this was swift
Mezentius, pouncing on the crowded ranks.
730 He hit unlucky Acron, whose heels beat on
black earth, the bloodied spear snapped by his fall.
But he didn’t deign to kill Orodes as he
fled, or inflict a spear wound from behind.
He ran to face him man to man: a better
victory without stealth. Bracing his foot
321

on the corpse, he pulled hard on his spear and cried:
“Men, here lies Orodes, a bastion of war!”
His friends took up his glad refrain. But the
victim gasped last words: “Vengeance will come,
740 stranger. You won’t rejoice long. For you as well
an equal fate awaits. Soon these fields will hold you.”
Mezentius smiled thinly through his rage: “Die now.
The father of the gods and king of men will see
to me.” He yanked the spear from the body.
Bleak rest and iron sleep weighed down Orodes’ eyes.
Their light was quenched for an eternal night.
Caedicus killed Alcathoüs, Sacrator
killed Hydaspes, Rapo killed Parthenius
and strong Orses. Messapus killed Clonius
750 and Erichaetes, one thrown from his bareback horse,
one on foot. Lycian Agis came up just to
fall to Valerus, brave as his ancestors.
Salius killed Thronius, but Nealces
got him. His stealthy long-range arrows were well-known.
Now grim Mars dealt death and sorrow equally.
They killed and died alike, victors and their
victims. Neither side would think to yield.
The gods in Jove’s high halls felt pity for this pointless
rage, the awful suffering of mortals.
760 Here sat Venus and there Juno, looking on as
pale Tisiphone ran riot among thousands.
And now stormy Mezentius, shaking his great
spear, advanced across the field, towering like
322

Orion when he walks on foot along
the ocean’s awesome depths, shoulder-high to waves,
or hauls an ancient ash tree down the mountain,
his feet on the ground, his head lost in the clouds.
So Mezentius rushed on with fearsome weapons.
Aeneas spied him in the enemy’s front line
770 and closed in for the combat. Unperturbed and steadfast,
Mezentius waited for the great-souled fighter,
measuring how far his spear could fly. “Right hand,”
he said, “you’re my only god. Help me now,
and you, the spear I throw! Lausus, I swear you’ll wear
the spoils I rip from this pirate’s corpse—you’ll be
the token of my victory.” He threw his hissing
spear. But it angled off Aeneas’ shield
and struck noble Antores, Hercules’s friend
from Argos, in the side. This man had joined Evander
780 and settled in a local town. Poor wretch, he died
from a wound not meant for him, as he looked up
at the sky and thought of lovely Argos.
Then pious Aeneas threw his spear. It pierced
the concave shield of three bronze layers, linen
folds, and three bull’s-hides, lodging near
Mezentius’ groin—but its flight stopped there.
The sight of Tuscan blood gladdened Aeneas.
He grabbed his sword and furiously charged
his shaken enemy. But Lausus saw, and groaned
790 with deep love for his father, shedding tears.
Lausus, I won’t silence your memory,
your hard death, or your heroism, if indeed
history tells the truth about your exploits.
As his father turned to crawl away, helpless,
323

handicapped, dragging his shield and Aeneas’
spear, his son rushed in between them, parrying
Aeneas’ sword just as his right hand rose to strike,
stopping him and fending off the blow.
His friends shouted loudly, throwing spears
800 and lances to repel Aeneas, so the father
could retreat while shielded by his son.
Aeneas, furious, kept under cover—as when
clouds fling down a fierce hailstorm; every farmer,
every plowman scatters from the fields,
the traveler finds shelter under riverbanks
or the arch of some high cliff while rain
batters the earth; but they resume their day when
the sun returns. So, lashed by spears all
around, Aeneas waited out the thunderhead
810 of war, shouting rebukes and threats at Lausus:
“Why this hurry to meet death, to dare what’s past
your strength? Your piety lures you to be rash.”
But Lausus pressed on, the fool. Fury surged up
in the Trojan, and the Fates gathered the final
threads of Lausus’ life. Aeneas drove his hard blade
through the young man’s body. The pointed tip went through
his shield (too thin to match his threats) and the tunic
that his mother wove with soft gold mesh. It sank in
to the hilt. Blood filled his lungs; his mournful life
820 descended to the shades, abandoning his body.
But when Anchises’ son looked at his dying face,
that ashen otherworldly face, he groaned deeply,
pitying the boy, and stretched his hand to him.
His own paternal piety came to his mind.
324

“Poor boy, what can pious Aeneas give you
worthy of your bravery and noble nature?
Keep the armor you so loved. I return you
to the ghosts and ashes of your ancestors,
if you can care. Your unhappy death has one sole
830 comfort: you fell to great Aeneas.” Rebuking Lausus’
lagging friends, he lifted the corpse up from
the earth, as blood defiled his well-curled hair.
Meanwhile, by the Tiber’s banks, Lausus’ father
cleaned his wounds with water, propped against a trunk.
His bronze helmet dangled from a branch;
the heavy armor rested on the grass.
His chosen men stood round him as he gasped in pain,
neck bent, long beard spilling down his chest.
He kept asking about Lausus, he kept sending
840 men to call him at a sad father’s request.
But Lausus’ weeping friends were bringing the corpse
on his shield, a great man killed by a great wound.
His father heard the groaning from far off
with terrible foreboding. Defiling his white hair
with dust, he stretched both hands upward and embraced
his son. “Did such a lust for life possess me, child,
that I let you take my place before the killer’s
sword? My son, did these gashes save your father,
who lives thanks to your death? Now at last I feel
850 the horror of my exile, the depth of my wound!
My son, I stained your name with my own crimes.
Hatred drove me from my father’s throne and rule:
it was I who owed atonement to my people’s
hate, the guilt was mine. I should have paid by any
325

death at all. I still haven’t left this land,
this light. But leave I will.” He got up on his injured
thigh, resolute, and though the deep wound sapped
his strength, he called for his horse. This was his pride
and comfort; on it he rode a victor out of every
860 combat. He spoke to the grieving animal:
“Rhaebus, we’ve lived long, if anything is long
in mortal terms. Today you’ll bring back bloody spoils
and Aeneas’ head, avenging Lausus’ death
with me; or if our force finds no way forward,
we’ll fall together. Brave beast, I don’t think
you’d follow orders from a Trojan master.”
Mounting his horse, he sat as he always did
and loaded both hands with sharp lances, his helmet
flashing with its horsehair-crest. Like this
870 he plunged into the fray, his heart seething
with great shame and madness mixed with grief.
And now he called Aeneas three times, loudly.*
Aeneas knew him and was glad. He prayed:
“May great Apollo and the father of the gods
bring this to be. Start the fight!” He ran
to face Mezentius, his spear poised.
But he replied: “Why try to terrify me now,
you savage who killed my son? That was the only
way to ruin me: I don’t fear death or care for
880 gods. Hush. I come to die, but first I bring you
gifts.” He hurled his long lance at his enemy,
then another and another as he circled
him. They landed, but the gilded shield held them.
Three times he wheeled leftward round his watching
enemy, throwing lances; three times the Trojan
326

hauled around the massive iron forest fixed
in his bronze shield. Then, sick of long delay,
sick of plucking out so many lances, pressed by
the unequal fight, at last
890 he broke free and hurled his spear at the stallion’s
head. The horse reared up and thrashed the air with hooves,
throwing his rider. Beast and man fell in a tangled
heap, the horse’s shoulder broken. From both sides,
shouts set the sky on fire. Aeneas flew to him,
pulling out his sword, and said: “Where’s fierce
Mezentius now, and that savagery of spirit?”
The Tuscan looked up at the sky, gulping air,
and answered as he came back to himself.
900 “Bitter enemy, why these taunts and threats?
Killing me’s no crime; I didn’t come to battle
on such terms. My Lausus made no pact with you
for me. I ask one thing, a kindness for a fallen
enemy: let my corpse be buried. I know
my people’s bitter hate surrounds me: block their rage,
I beg you. Let me lie in Lausus’ tomb.” He spoke,
and took the sword into his throat, knowing death.
His life pumped out in bloody waves over his armor.

327

BOOK 11

TRUCE AND CONFLICT

Meanwhile Dawn rose over Ocean’s rim.
Aeneas’ grief would have him turn to burying
his friends; he reeled with Pallas’ death. Still,
he paid the gods a victor’s vows at daybreak.
On a mound, he raised a huge oak stripped of branches
and dressed it in bright armor—spoils he took
from Lord Mezentius to be a gift for you,
great God of War: a helmet crest that oozed
with blood, the broken spears and battered breastplate
10 punctured in twelve places. He set the bronze shield
to the trunk’s left side and hung the ivory-hilted
sword on top. Then he rallied the triumphant
soldiers as the leaders thronged around him:
“We’ve managed a great feat, my men. Let go any
fear that remains. Here stand a tyrant’s spoils,
the first fruits of war; here’s my Mezentius.
Now we march to King Latinus’ walls.
Draw your swords, set your hearts and hopes on war!
Once the gods tell us to hoist the standards
20 and march our men from camp, don’t be taken
by surprise—no second thoughts or fear!
For now, let’s put the bodies of our friends

328

in earth, the only glory in deep Acheron.
Honor the great souls who won this country
with their blood; pay their final rites. But first
we must take Pallas to Evander’s mourning city.
The day of darkness swept him off, for all
his courage, and plunged him into bitter death.”
In tears, Aeneas went back to the threshold
30 where Pallas’ lifeless body lay. Old Acoetes
was guarding it. He was once the armor-bearer
for Evander, then chosen as a ward for this
dear child, a pairing that would prove less happy.
The slaves stood round the body with the Trojan
troops and Trojan women, their hair loose in mourning.
And when Aeneas came through the high entrance,
the women beat their chests, and a great groan rose up
to the stars. The royal tent rang out with grief.
He saw Pallas with his head propped up, his face
40 pale as snow, the smooth chest gaping with its wound
from an Italian spear. His tears welled again.
“When Fortune smiled on me, poor boy, was your
life the cost, so you’d never see our kingdom,
or ride in triumph to your father’s house?
This was not my promise to Evander when I
left, when he sent me off with an embrace
to win a mighty empire, warning me with fear
that we’d fight fierce men, a ruthless race.
Still now perhaps, beguiled by hollow hope,
50 he offers vows and heaps gifts on the altar
while we sadly escort back this lifeless boy—
an empty honor—who owes nothing to the gods.
329

Unlucky man, your child’s heart-rending burial
awaits. Is this the glorious return we pledged?
Is this my solemn promise? But Evander, you won’t
see him with shameful wounds, you wouldn’t want to wish death
on a coward son. O Italy, you’ve lost
your great protector, and Iülus, so have you!”

Aeneas wept, and had them lift the wretched body.
60 He sent a thousand men selected from the troops
to escort the funeral and share the father’s
tears, scant comfort for so great a grief, yet
an homage due a parent’s sorrow. Others quickly
wove a bier of pliant wicker from arbutus
and oaken sprigs. On top they spread a canopy
of leaves. They laid the young man out, high on
his rustic litter. He was like a flower
plucked by a girl’s hand, a fragile violet
or drooping hyacinth, whose bloom and beauty
70 had not started to fade, though Mother Earth
no longer offered nourishment or strength.
Aeneas fetched two garments stiff with gold and purple.
Sidonian Dido had made these for him with
her own hands, happy in her task, working
the fabric with fine threads of gold. He sadly
laid one over the young man, a final honor;
the one he put over the hair the pyre would burn.
He heaped up many war-prizes from the Laurentians
to be carried in the long procession, and added
80 spears and horses taken from the enemy.
330

Then he chose captives to be offerings to the dead
and bound their arms. They’d splash Pallas’ pyre with blood.*
Now he told his captains to hoist tree trunks
named for the dead foes, armed with their weapons.
Wretched Acoetes, weak with age, was led
along. He beat his chest with fists and clawed his face,
falling prostrate on the ground. Next came chariots
spattered with Rutulian blood, and Pallas’ war-horse
Aëthon without regalia, weeping as
90 he walked, his muzzle wet with giant tears.
They brought his spear and helmet: the victor Turnus
had the rest. The grieving army followed: Trojans,
Etruscans, and Arcadians, their spears reversed.
When this line of comrades had gone a good way,
Aeneas stopped and said with a deep groan:
“The harsh fate of war calls me to other griefs.
Farewell forever, greatest Pallas; forever
goodbye.” He said just this, then turned
his steps back to the high walls of his camp.
100 Meanwhile envoys turned up from the Latin city

wearing olive wreaths and asking for a favor.
Could the bodies cut down on the battlefield
be returned for burial? Surely there was
no quarrel with the lifeless victims? Let him
show mercy to those he once called hosts and in-laws.
Kind Aeneas granted them this favor,
not one to be rejected, but he added this:
“Latins, what bad luck unjustly tangled you
in such conflict? Why turn from your former friends?
110 You plead for grace for men killed in the lottery
331

of war. I’d gladly give it to the living too.
I’ve only come because my fated home is here.
It’s not your people whom I fight, it’s your king,
who broke our ties and put his trust in Turnus’ army.
It would have been more fair for Turnus to face death.
If he plans to end the war by force and drive
the Trojans out, then he and I should have crossed swords.
The winner would have lived, through his own skill
or a god’s help. Now go, and stoke the pyre
120 under your fallen citizens.” Stunned to silence,
they looked at one another with a searching gaze.
Then the oldest, Drances, who detested Turnus
and kept hurling charges at the younger man,
replied: “Trojan hero, great in fame, greater
in war, how can I raise your praises to the sky?
Should I first admire your justice, or your prowess?
We’re glad to take these words back to our native walls,
and if Fortune grants a way, we’ll ally you
with King Latinus. Turnus can find his own treaties.
130 We’ll even raise the great walls owed to you
by Fate, and load our backs with Trojan rocks.”
He spoke; they all roared assent as one.
They fixed on twelve days’ truce.* Now Trojans mingled
with the Latins, and safely roamed the forest ridges
in the short-lived peace. Tall trees rang with ax-blows.
Eagerly, they uprooted soaring pines,
cut down fragrant cedar, split oak trees with wedges,
and carried mountain rowans on their groaning carts.
Now winged Rumor, heartbreak’s herald, filled
332

140 Evander’s ears, home, and city—Rumor, who’d just

told of Pallas’ victories in Latium.
Holding torches, their custom for funerals,
Arcadians streamed out to the gates. The road
became a line of flame lighting up the fields.
They fell in sadly with the crowd of Trojans.
When the mothers saw this group arriving at
their homes, they set the grieving town afire with cries.
Nothing could restrain Evander. He pushed
into the crowd. As Pallas’ bier was lowered,
150 he collapsed and clung to it, groaning, sobbing.
At last his pain allowed a passage for his voice:
“Pallas, this wasn’t what you pledged your father—
that you’d be careful on the killing fields of war.
I knew where pride in one’s first arms could lead,
and the sweet honor of victory in first combat.
I mourn your too-young sacrifice, the harsh lessons
of a war too close, and my vows and prayers
heard by not one god! My blessed wife,
how fortunate you were to die before this grief.
160 I’ve outlived my very life: I’m my son’s
survivor. I wish I’d joined the army of our Trojan
allies, that Rutulian spears had rained on me,
that this march brought my corpse home, not Pallas’!
I don’t blame you, Trojans, nor our pact, nor
the hands we clasped as friends: this was the fate assigned
to my old age. But if an early death was destined
for my son, I’m glad he first killed thousands of the
Volscians, and led Trojans to Latium.
Pallas, I could want no nobler funeral
170 for you than one held by pious Aeneas, the great
333

Trojans, Tuscan chiefs and all their troops.
They bring great spoils from the victims of your sword.
You too would be a huge trunk decked with armor,
Turnus, if Pallas were your age or had your strength.
But my sorrow must not keep the Trojans
from the fight. Go, and tell this to your king:
with Pallas gone, I linger on in hateful life
only for your sword, which owes Turnus to me
and to my son. Only here is there room for
180 luck and glory; I find life’s joys repellent.
I’ll take the news to Pallas in the Underworld.”
Now Dawn brought her kindly light to heartsick
humans—and with it, work and pain. Father
Aeneas and Tarchon set up pyres along the curving
shore. They fetched the corpses of their men.
As was the custom, sooty flames were lit below
the bodies; the sky was veiled by grimy smoke.
Three times the soldiers in their shining bronze
ran around the blazing fires, three times the horsemen
190 circled the sad pyres, calling out in grief.
Their weapons and the earth were wet with tears.
The shouts of men and blares of horns rose skyward.
Some threw spoils from slaughtered Latins in the flames
—helmets and fine swords, bridles, once-warm wheels
of chariots. Others added presents well known
to the dead, their own shields and luckless spears.
Many hulking bulls were sacrificed to Death.
Over flames, they slashed the throats of bristly boars
and sheep seized from the fields. Holding vigil
200 over half-burnt mounds, they watched their comrades blaze
334

along the shore. They could not tear themselves away
till damp night ferried in the bright star-studded sky.
Elsewhere, but no differently, the anguished Latins
raised up countless pyres. Of their many dead,
some they buried in the earth, some they hauled
to nearby fields or sent on to the towns. The rest
they set on fire—a massive heap of muddled corpses
without order, without honor. The ruined fields
and close-set biers blazed for both the armies.
210 When the third dawn drove chill dark away,
they raked and smoothed deep ash and nameless bones,
mourning, and heaped warm mounds of earth on top.
The greatest clamor, the greatest part of the long grieving,
was in rich Latinus’ city and its homes.
Here sad wives and mothers, sons turned into orphans,
and the loving hearts of weeping sisters
all damned the deadly war and Turnus’ marriage:
he and only he should end this by the sword,
he was the one who wanted to rule Italy!
220 Fierce Drances fed the flames: he swore that Turnus
had been challenged to a duel all alone.
But many dissenting views were heard as well
in Turnus’ favor. He was shielded by the power
of the queen and his fame from many triumphs.

To crown this commotion, as the heated quarrel
raged, glum legates from Diomedes’ great town
returned with his answer. All their efforts
335

had done nothing; the gifts and gold, their urgent
prayers had been useless. They had to look for
230 allies elsewhere, or ask the Trojan king for peace.
This dreadful blow prostrated even King Latinus.
The anger of the gods, the many fresh-dug graves,
showed him that Aeneas had been sent by gods
and Fate. He summoned a high council of the local
chiefs to meet within his home’s tall gates.
They all gathered, pouring to the palace through
the crowded streets. As the oldest and most
powerful, Latinus, grim-faced, took the center.
He told the envoys who’d arrived from Diomedes
240 to report their news, everything in sequence.
There was a call for silence. Then, obeying
the king’s order, Venulus began to speak:
“Citizens: we reached Diomedes’ Argive
settlement, overcoming all the dangers
of the road. We clasped the hand by which Troy fell.
He’d built Argyripa, named for his father’s folk,
after winning Iäpyx’ fields near Garganus.
When we entered and were granted leave to speak,
we gave our gifts, told him our names and country,
250 named our attackers and the reason for our trip
to Arpi. He heard and answered calmly:
‘Happy race of Saturn’s realm, Italians
of old, what fortune rouses you from peace
and convinces you to rile up risky wars?
All of us whose swords defiled the fields of Troy
(forget what we endured in battle under those high
walls, all the men Simoïs drowned) paid dreadful
336

penance for our crimes, lashed across the earth.
Even Priam might have pitied us: witness
260 Minerva’s cruel storm and the cliffs of vengeful
Caphereus. Homeless Menelaus, driven
from that war to other shores, reached Proteus’
Pillars; Ulysses saw the Cyclopes of Etna.
Think of Pyrrhus’ realm, Idomeneus’ ruined
home, Locrians left on the coast of Libya,
or Agamemnon of Mycene, who led the mighty
Greeks—his vile wife struck him down at his own door.
Her lover lurked in wait for Asia’s conqueror.
The jealous gods denied me my ancestral altars,
270 my longed-for wife, and lovely Calydon.
Still the ghastly sight of portents harries me:
my vanished comrades seek the sky on wings
and flit among the streams as birds (this was their
punishment). They fill the cliffs with songs of sorrow.
I should have expected this, ever since
I madly struck a goddess’ body with my sword,
defiling Venus’ hand with blood. No:
don’t impose this conflict on me. After the fall
of Pergamum, I’ve had no fight with Troy. I take
280 no pleasure in recalling these old sufferings.
The gifts you bring me from your homeland, give them
to Aeneas. I stood against his fierce sword
when we fought our duel. Trust me: I saw how high
he loomed above his shield, how forcefully
he hurled his spear.* If Ida’s land had raised two more
like him, the Trojans would have reached the Argive towns
with ease, and defeated Greece would mourn her fate.
While we waited round the sturdy walls of Troy,
337

our victory was stalled by Hector and Aeneas,
290 rebuffed for ten years. Both men excelled
in bravery and skill in battle; Aeneas
in piety. If you can, clasp hands and make
a pact. Don’t let your weapons clash in war.’
Best of kings, you’ve heard the king’s response,
and the views he holds on this great conflict.”
He’d hardly finished, when an anxious hubbub
of mixed voices rose up from the Latins—like
a rushing river slowed by boulders; its trapped waters
churn and roar, currents crash against the banks.
300 Once they were calm and the anxious cries died down,
the king invoked the gods and spoke from his high throne:
“Latins: I wish we’d made the better choice—
to solve this crisis earlier, and not to call
a council now, with enemies camped by our walls.
We were rash to battle with a race of divine
blood. They’re unconquered; no fights tire them.
Even in defeat they can’t lay down the sword.
If you hoped for Aetolian allies, cease to.
Anyone can hope, but you see the odds.
310 As for the rest of our affairs: everything
lies smashed in ruins before your eyes and hands.
I blame no one. What the greatest bravery
could do, we did. We fought with all our kingdom’s strength.
I’ll tell you the decision I’ve now reached
after much reflection; listen to my words.
I own an ancient tract along the Tuscan river.
It stretches west of the Sicanians.
338

The Arauncans and Rutulians plow the flinty
hills, and use the wildest parts for pasture.
320 All this land, with its pine-clad mountain
ridge, should be added to a Trojan pact.
Let’s fix fair terms and summon them to share our rule.
If this is their desire, they can settle here
and build their walls. If they want other lands
and people, and can safely leave our soil,
let’s build them twenty ships of native oak. If they
have the men for more, there’s timber nearby.
They can say how many ships they need,
and of what sort. We’ll give them workers, bronze,
330 and docks. Also: a hundred Latin nobles must go
to report my words and ratify the treaty.
Extend olive branches, offer gifts
and weights of gold and ivory, my throne
and robe of state, emblems of my rule.
Let’s consult on how to help our ruined land.”
Drances, hostile still, stood up. Turnus’ glory
was a bitter goad to him, a source of secret
envy. He was free with wealth, and eloquent,
but froze in war; a wise guide in councils,
340 but good at rousing riots; noble on his
mother’s side, but unknown on his father’s.
With his words he stoked the common anger.
“Good king, you ask advice on issues that are
clear without debate. They all know how
our luck goes, but they won’t say it aloud.
Turnus should stop his swaggering and let me speak.
His ill favor with the gods, his evil character
339

(I’ll say it, let him threaten me with death)
have caused many of our greatest men to die,
350 have sunk our town in grief. Meanwhile he provokes
the Trojan camp and waves his weapons at the sky,
trusting in escape. Best of kings, add just
one thing to the many gifts and words you send
the Trojans: don’t let anyone use violence
to stop a father from the marriage of his daughter
to a great man in a fitting union,
thus bringing peace. But if such fear grips your minds
and hearts, let’s beg this favor from the man himself.
Turnus, grant our king and country their just rights.
360 Why keep throwing our poor people in harm’s way?
You’re the source of all our suffering.
War won’t save us. We all ask for peace—
and the single sacred bond that brings it.
I’ll be the first to beg, though you claim I hate you
(so be it): have pity on your people, set
your pride aside. You’ve lost, so leave. In our rout,
we’ve seen enough of death and ruined land.
If glory drives you and there’s so much strength in you,
if a palace as your dowry is so precious,
370 dare your confidence against the enemy.
So Turnus can win a royal wife, should
our cheap lives be scattered through the battle-fields,
a crowd unburied and unwept? You—
if there’s any spine in you, any of
your father’s fight, go face your challenger!”
Turnus’ temper blazed up at this speech.
He groaned and burst out with deep feeling: “Drances,
340

there’s always floods of eloquence from you
when battle calls for action. You’re the first to come
380 whenever council’s called. But the senate doesn’t
need the boasts that fly from you while you are safe,
while the enemy’s outside the walls, and our
moats don’t run with blood. So thunder eloquently,
as you do, but don’t charge me with fear until
your hand has heaped up piles of Trojan dead
and decked the fields with trophies. Shall we see
what real courage can do? We don’t have far to go
to find the enemy: they ring our walls.
Come, we’re off to battle—why so slow?
390 Will your fighting always be your flapping tongue,
those feet so quick to flee? You say I’ve lost?
Who’d rightly say I’d lost, you filth? You saw
the swollen Tiber surge with Trojan blood,
Evander’s house and family mowed down,
the Arcadians stripped of armor. ‘Losing’
is not how Bitias and huge Pandarus
saw it, nor the thousand men I sent to Hades
in one day while trapped inside the Trojan walls.
‘War won’t save us’? Fool, prophesy this wisdom
400 to Aeneas and yourself. Go on, alarm
us all with panic, praise the power of a twicedefeated race, deride Latinus’ forces.
You’d claim the leaders of the Myrmidons tremble
at Trojan weapons—Achilles and Tydeus’ son
as well! Indeed, and the Aufidus flows backward
from the Adriatic. The man says my threats
scare him (clever ploy!) and backs his lies by quaking.
Have no fear, you’ll never lose your life
341

at my hands. Keep it in your coward chest.
410 King, I return to our important plans.
If you don’t trust to weapons any more,
if we’re on our own, and completely ruined
after one repulse, if Fortune cannot change,
let’s beg for peace, holding out our wobbly hands.
But oh, if we had some of our usual courage!
I’d count the man who chose to die and bite the dust
instead of seeing such a day, lucky beyond
others in the fight, a paragon of courage.
But if we have supplies and unharmed men,
420 if Italian troops and towns are still our allies,
if the Trojans’ glory cost them dear in blood
(they too had their funerals, the same storm battered
all of us), why this shameful hesitation
at the start? Why do we tremble at the bugle?
The passing days, the changes brought by shifting time
can improve much. Sly Fortune comes in different shapes.
She can set her victims back on solid ground.
If Arpi won’t help, Messapus and good
Tolumnius will, and the chiefs so many sent.
430 No small glory will attend the chosen men
of Latium and the Laurentian fields,
and Camilla of the noble Volscian race,
with her mounted troops like blooms in bronze.
If the Trojans challenge me to single combat
with your blessing, if I impede our common good,
I’ll take my chances, with so much at stake.
Victory hardly hates or shuns my hands.
I’ll fight him bravely—no matter if he’s stronger than
342

Achilles or wears Vulcan’s armor like him. I pledge
440 my life to you and to father Latinus, I,
Turnus: a lesser warrior than none before.
Aeneas calls on me alone? I hope he does.
If the gods are angry, it should not be Drances
who pays the price of death, or wins glory and honor.”
While they clashed over these doubtful matters,
Aeneas moved his camp and army. And now
a messenger ran through the palace, sowing
chaos, filling all the town with terror. His news:
the Trojans and their Tuscan troops were marching
450 from the Tiber. Their army swept the plains!
At once, the common folk were shaken and disturbed.
Their rage grew at this stinging provocation.
Eagerly, the young men roared for weapons;
sad fathers wept and murmured. Everywhere,
a clamor of dissent rose to the skies, noisy
as a flock that comes to roost in a high forest,
or raucous swans who honk along the fish-rich
Padusa and its chattering marshes. Turnus
grabbed his chance. “That’s right, citizens, call
460 a council, sit here praising peace. Meanwhile,
they’re armed and invading.” He said no more,
but leapt up and sprinted from the palace,
commanding Volusus to arm the Volsican squadrons
and lead the Rutulians. “Messapus and Coras,
arm the cavalry with Coras’ brother, and spread
them out. Some should back the gates, others man
the towers. The rest, attack where and when I say.”

343

At once all the city scurried to the walls.
But Latinus left the council, dropping
470 his grand plans, dismayed at this dark turn,
blaming himself often for not welcoming
Aeneas to the city as his son-in-law.
Meanwhile men dug trenches at the gates or hauled up
stones and stakes. The harsh bugle blared war’s bloody
signal. Then a mingled crowd of wives and children
ringed the wall: this last struggle called them all.
The queen rode in her chariot to Pallas’ temple
and high citadel, many mothers with her,
bringing gifts. Lavinia sat beside her,
480 the cause of so much grief, her lovely eyes cast down.
The women entered and lit incense, scenting all
the shrine, pouring out sad pleas: “Virgin
Pallas, great in war, queen of battle,
break the spears of the Phrygian bandit, hurl him
prostrate on the ground before our city gates.”
Turnus armed himself impatiently, raging
to fight. He put the bright breastplate on,
bristling with bronze mail. His calves were cased in gold,
his sword strapped to his side, his head still bare.
490 He gleamed with metal as he swept down from the
heights, exultant. In his mind, he’d already won.
He was like a horse who rips his tether and
escapes the stalls. Reaching open grassland,
free at last, he heads for pastures and for herds
of mares, or flashes out for streams he used to bathe in,
whinnying, holding high his head,
joyous as his mane plays on his back and neck.

344

Camilla and her Volscian army rushed to meet him.
At the gates, the queen leapt down from her horse.
500 All the cohort followed suit, dismounting
in a fluid move. She said, “Turnus,
if the brave are right to trust themselves,
I’ll dare to charge Aeneas’ troops and ride alone
against the Tuscan cavalry: this is my pledge.
Let me scout out war’s first dangers while you
take a post along the walls and guard the city.”
Turnus answered, eyes fixed on the dangerous girl:
“O glory of Italy, how can I thank you
or repay you? For now—since your courage
510 dwarfs reward—share the struggle with me.
Vile Aeneas (rumor says, and our scouts
confirm) has sent his light-armed horse ahead.
Their hooves shake the plains as he heads for town
over mountain peaks and lonely ridges. I’ll set
an ambush at a byroad in the forest, and
guard the pass at both ends with armed men.
You’ll confront the charging Tuscan cavalry
with fierce Messenus, Latin squadrons, and
Tiburtus’ troops. Lead them and take charge.”
520 He urged Messapus and the allied chiefs to combat
too. Then he left to meet the enemy.
There’s a winding valley that’s well suited
to treachery and tricks of war. On both sides,
dark slopes press it with dense growth. A faint pathway
leads there from a narrow, stinting pass.
Above, among the crags and near the peak,
there’s a hidden clearing and safe shelter.
345

You can attack from either side, or roll down
giant rocks while standing on the ridge.
530 Turnus knew the way. He came to take
his post, lurking in the dangerous woods.
Now in her high home, Latona’s daughter
summoned Opis, swift of foot, from her band
of sacred virgins. She said sadly: “Dear girl:
Camilla leaves for cruel combat with my armor,
which won’t help. She’s loved by me beyond all
others—not through some new passion; this is
no sudden sweetness that has moved my heart.
When Metabus, hated for his haughty rule,
540 left his land and ancient Privernum, fleeing
from the heart of war, he took his baby
with him. He called her Camilla, altering
her mother’s name, Casmilla, by one letter.
Clutching her to his chest, he rode for long and
lonely forest crests. But when sharp spears menaced
on all sides, and Volscian soldiers circled him
as he fled, he spied the river Amasenus,
full and frothing at its banks—such a storm
had broken from the clouds. He could swim across,
550 but fear for his cherished burden held him back.
He thought it through and made a quick and painful choice.
He took the giant spear, hard with knots
and seasoned oak, that his strong hand carried
into war, wrapped his child in woodland cork-bark,
and tied this handy bundle to the spear’s center.
He raised it in his massive fist and cried to heaven:
‘Kind Diana of the woods, a father vows his
346

child to you. She’s your supplicant, and holds
your weapon first, as she flies from enemies.
560 I beg you, goddess, take what’s yours: I yield her now
to the chance winds.’ He drew back and threw
the spinning spear. Poor Camilla flew across
the roaring river on the hissing shaft.
Metabus, the great crowd on his heels ever
closer, plunged into the river—and emerged.
The grassy bank gave back both spear and child,
Diana’s gift. Since towns wouldn’t let him in their
homes or walls (he was too fierce to be civil),
he fed his child among the brush and bristling lairs.
570 A humble shepherd in the lonely mountains,
he nursed her on a wild mare’s fresh milk;
he’d squeeze the udder’s drops onto her baby lips.
And when she first walked on her infant feet,
he armed her hands with a sharp lance and hung
a bow and arrows from her tiny shoulder.
Instead of gold clasps and long capes to wear,
a tiger’s pelt draped from her head over her back.
Already then she scattered child-sized spears from tender
hands and whirled a smooth sling round her head,
580 bringing down a crane or snowy swan.
Many mothers in the Tuscan towns were keen
to wed her to their sons, in vain. She was happy
with Diana, and nursed an endless love of weapons
and virginity, untouched. I wish this war
had not encouraged her to challenge Trojans.
She’s precious to me; she’d remain one of our band.
But since harsh fate is at her heels, glide down
from the sky and visit Latium, nymph,
347

where grim battle rages under gloomy omens.
590 Take this quiver, draw an arrow to avenge her:
whoever wounds her sacred flesh, Trojan
or Italian, must pay an equal price
in blood. I’ll carry her poor body and unlooted
armor in a hollow cloud for burial
in her own land.” Jangling, veiled in a dark whirlwind,
Opis slipped down through the gentle breezes.
Meanwhile the Trojan army, Tuscan chiefs
and all the cavalry marshaled in ranks
approached the walls. The horses reared and whinnied
600 through the fields, fighting their tight reins, wheeling
this way and that. Everywhere, the land bristled
with spears, fields aflame with sunlit weapons.
Messapus and the fast-moving Latins faced them
on the plain; also Coras with his brother
and Camilla’s wing. Spears jutted skyward
in hands pulled back to throw, and lances quivered.
The march of men and screams of horses grew hot.
Each side stopped short within a spear’s throw,
then suddenly burst forward screaming, spurring
610 frothing horses. Weapons rained down on all sides
as thick as snow, shadowing the sky to darkness.
Tyrrhenus and fiery Aconteus smashed
head-on, wielding lances. They were the first to fall,
colliding loudly as their horses crashed together,
breastbone against breastbone. Aconteus
flew off like a thunderbolt or stone hurled from
a catapult. His life-breath scattered to the breezes.

348

Now the lines broke up. The Latins wheeled
their horses to the walls and slung their shields across
620 their backs. Acilas chased them with the Trojan troops.
But near the gates, the Latins raised the shout again
and pulled around their horses’ supple necks.
Now it was the Trojans who retreated with slack
reins. They were like the ocean’s ebb and flow.
Sometimes it sweeps to shore and coats the rocks
with froth, its arc soaking the far sand,
sometimes it quickly ebbs, sucking back
the rolling scree as the shallows boil.
Twice, Tuscans pushed Rutulians to the walls;
630 twice, they were repelled, and had to guard their backs
with shields. But in the third clash, all the ranks were
tangled: each man marked his target. Then truly
you could hear the dying moans in that bloody
mess of bodies, weapons, half-dead horses
twitching in men’s blood. The savage fighting surged.
Orsilochus, fearing to face Remulus,
flung his spear at his horse. It went in
by the ear and the stallion reared, pawing
at the air in agony; his rider, thrown,
640 writhed on the ground. Catillus killed Iöllas
and Herminius, a huge man with huge courage
and huge weapons, his blond head and torso bare,
not afraid of wounds, his giant frame exposed.
A spear pierced his broad shoulders and stuck there
quivering. It folded him in pain. Pools
of gore were everywhere. Fighting, they dealt
death with iron, seeking wounds to die with glory.

349

There in the carnage raged Camilla with her quiver,
one breast bared for battle like an Amazon.
650 She hurled a rain of pliant lances, or raised
her heavy battle-ax in her tireless hand.
Diana’s gold bow jangled on her shoulder.
Even when she had to yield, she shot arrows
while escaping, her bow turned to face the fight.
Around her was her chosen band: young Larina,
Tulla, and Tarpeia swinging her bronze ax,
all daughters of Italy. Divine Camilla
chose them as her honor-guard to help in peace
or war—like Amazons riding across the river
660 Thermodon, or fighting by Hippolyte
in painted armor, or shrilling loudly when Mars’ child
Penthesilea came back in her chariot
and her crescent-shielded women troops rejoiced.
Fierce girl, who were the first and last to fall
under your spear? How many dying bodies did you
spread on earth? First, Eunaeus, son of Clytius.
Her pine lance pierced his unguarded chest
and he fell, retching streams of blood. Dying,
he bit the bloody earth, coiling round his wound.
670 Next, Liris and Pagasus, one thrown from
his fallen horse and reaching for the reins,
one rushing to help, no weapon in his hand.
She dropped both there and added Amastrus,
Hippotas’ son. Rising in her seat, she speared
Tereus, Demophoön, Harpalycus,
and Chromis. Every shaft whirled from her hand
found its Trojan. Far off, the hunter Ornytus
350

was riding an Iäpygian horse, in foreign armor.
A hide stripped from a bull sat on the fighter’s
680 massive shoulders, and a white-fanged wolf-jaw
gaped over his head; in those rustic hands
he held a hunting knife. He rode in the middle
of the ranks but stood a full head higher.
Overtaking him (it was easy, in the rout),
she pierced him through and said with hate: “Tuscan,
did you think that you were flushing forest beasts?
The day has come that shows your boasts were lies,
and at a woman’s hands! But you’ll take great glory
to your fathers’ shades: Camilla’s spear killed you.”
690 Next were Butes and Orsilochus, largest

of the Trojans. She speared Butes from behind,
between the helmet and the breastplate, where his neck
gleamed white, on the left, the shield-side.
Orsilochus chased her in a giant circle,
but she tricked him into tighter ones, hunting
the hunted, then reared up and smashed her heavy ax
into his bones and armor as he begged for mercy
frantically. Warm brains from the blows streamed down
his face. Aunus’ fighting son, an Apennine,
700 chanced on her and froze in fear at the sight.
He was a good Ligurian liar, while fate allowed.*
When he saw he couldn’t use his horse
to get away and dodge the queen’s attack,
he tried a shrewd pretense and said with cunning:
“What’s so great about a woman counting on
her brawny horse? Forget escape! Be brave enough
to meet me face to face on even ground, fight me
351

on foot. You’ll soon know whose boasts of bravery
are meaningless.” Enraged and hot with fury,
710 she handed her horse to a friend, facing him
on foot and unafraid. Their weapons were the same:
a bare sword and a light shield. The soldier
thought his trick had worked. Off he raced at once,
pulling round the bridle to escape,
using iron spurs to goad his horse. “Stupid
Ligurian,” she cried, “puffed up with pride in vain!
You tried your slippery native skills for nothing.
Your ploy won’t bring you back unharmed to lying
Aunus.” On swift feet, just like a darting flame,
she overtook his horse, grabbed its reins,
720 and spilled his hated blood in vengeance—
easily, the way a sacred falcon soars from
some tall crag to chase a dove high in the clouds
and catches her, tearing out her guts with curling
claws. From the sky fall blood and tattered feathers.
The father of the gods and men, throned on high
Olympus, did not fail to see this. He spurred
Tuscan Tarchon into rage and bitter battle
with no gentle goad. Tarchon galloped out
to the slaughter and retreating ranks,
730 urging on the cavalry with varied shouts,
naming them, reviving beaten troops for war.
“What’s your fear, Tuscans—always slow to fight
but never shamed by it? What’s this great cowardice?
A woman scatters you and routs your ranks!
We carry swords and spears—for what? You’re not
slack for love’s nocturnal combat, or when
352

the curved flute calls for Bacchic dances! Yes,
wait for feasts and wine and groaning tables
(here’s passion and dedication!), till the seer
740 says all’s safe, till meaty sacrifices call you
to the groves!” With that he whipped his horse
into the fray, prepared for death, charging wildly
at Venulus. He tore him violently off his
horse and rode off with his enemy clutched to
his chest. Shouts rose to the sky; all the Latins
turned to watch. Tarchon flew like fire over
the plain with his armed prey. He snapped Venulus’ spear
at its metal tip, groping for an open spot
to stab a death-blow. Venulus fought back,
750 keeping that hand from his throat, surviving force
by force. Like a tawny eagle who’s snatched up
a snake and soared away, twining talons in
the wounded reptile; the snake forms slick coils,
raising its rough scales and hissing, trying
to rear up, but as the eagle beats the air
with wings, its hooked beak mauls its thrashing victim:
just so Tarchon took his prize from Tibur’s ranks,
triumphant. The Tuscans followed on their chief’s
example and success—they charged. Then Arruns,
760 doomed by Fate, circled swift Camilla with his
spear, a crafty fellow searching for an easy
chance. While the girl rode raging in the ranks,
Arruns stole up close and followed silently;
when she returned from killing enemies,
he yanked his quick reins furtively and trailed her.
Ruthless, he tried this approach and that, traced
her path on every side, and shook his well-aimed spear.
353

By chance Chloreus, once Cybele’s priest,
was gleaming from afar in Phrygian armor.
770 He rode a foaming mount whose leather saddle-cloth
was plumed with bronze scales and golden links.
Standing out in his exotic reds and purples,
he shot Cretan arrows from a golden Lycian
bow. It hung from the seer’s shoulders.
His helmet was gold too; a golden knot tied up
the rustling linen folds of saffron cloak.
His tunic and his Asian leggings were embroidered.
The huntress stalked this one man blindly in the strife
of war. She hoped to hang his Trojan weapons
780 in a temple, or flaunt herself in captive gold
—a girl on fire with a female’s lust for spoils,
riding recklessly through all the ranks.
At last Arruns saw his chance from where he lurked.
He threw his spear, praying to the gods above:
“Greatest of the gods, you who guard sacred
Soracte, we worship you first, Apollo. When pine-trees
feed your flames, we, your followers,
trust our faith and plant our steps on your live coals.
Almighty Father, let my sword obliterate
790 this source of shame. I don’t want spoils or trophies,
nothing that is hers. My other feats will bring
me fame. Just let me kill this pestilence,
and I’ll return unhonored to my native town.”

Apollo heard and granted one part of the plea.
354

The rest he scattered to swift breezes. Yes:
Arruns could kill the girl in her distraction
with a sudden blow, but he’d never see his
noble land again. The south wind took those words.
He threw his spear; it whistled through the breeze.
800 All the Volscians turned their sharp eyes, mindful,
to their queen. But she failed to note the rush
of air, the weapon flying through the sky,
until the spear found its mark. Wedged below
her naked breast, it drank deeply of her blood.
Her stricken band rushed up to catch their falling queen.
Arruns, the most terrified of all, fled
in mingled fear and joy. He didn’t dare to trust
his spear further, or face Camilla’s weapons.
He was like a wolf who’s killed a shepherd
810 or a giant bull and runs to hide in trackless
heights before the vengeful spears can find him.
He knows he went too far, and tucks his trembling tail
below his belly, heading for the woods.
Anxiously, he hid himself from sight,
content to get away and mingle with the ranks.
Camilla, dying, tugged the spear, but its iron
tip was wedged too deeply in her ribs.
Her blood draining, she collapsed; her eyes fell,
chill with death. Her bright complexion faded.
820 As she died she called to her friend Acca.
She’d been loyal beyond others to Camilla,
the only one to share her cares. “I’ve fought
this far, sister Acca. Now a bitter wound
has finished me. The world grows dark with shadow.
Run and take these last commands to Turnus:
355

he must take up the fight and keep the Trojans
from the town. And now, goodbye.” She released
her horse’s reins and weakly slipped to earth, cold,
departing from her body bit by bit. Her head
830 and neck drooped down in death; her weapons fell. Her soul
fled with a groan of protest to the shades below.
Now a huge cry rose and struck the golden stars.
With Camilla down, the fight was crueler still.
The Trojan army, Tuscan chiefs, and Evander’s
cavalry rushed at each other in dense ranks.
Diana’s sentry, Opis, had been resting on
a high ridge for some time, calmly gazing at
the fight. As the raging men sent up a roar,
she saw from far away Camilla’s killing.
840 She groaned and said these heartfelt words: “Oh no—
my child, you’ve paid too cruelly for your attempt
to wound the men of Troy in war! Your service
to Diana, your solitude in the wild woods,
shouldering her quiver, was no help to you.
Yet the queen won’t let you be dishonored
in your final hour. Your death won’t want for fame
among the nations, nor will you suffer shame,
dying unavenged. He whose wound defiled you
will die as he deserves.” Below that peak there lay
850 a giant burial-mound, its soil shaded by oaks,
for the ancient king Dercennus Laurens.
Swooping down, the lovely goddess landed
here first and looked for Arruns down below.
There he was, gleaming in his armor, puffed up
with vain pride. “Leaving us?” she asked. “Turn
356

this way, come and die. Receive a fitting prize
for Camilla’s death. Diana’s shafts will kill
even the likes of you.” The goddess took a speedy
arrow from her golden quiver and drew her bow,
860 hating him, pulling evenly until
the curved tips almost met. Her left hand touched
the iron tip, her right the bowstring by her breast.
Arruns heard the hissing arrow and the rush
of air, just as the iron point lodged in his flesh.
His friends, forgetful, left him there, gasping out
his life, groaning in the fields’ ignoble dust.
But Opis soared on wings to high Olympus.
Their leader gone, Camilla’s light-armed wing fled first.
In shambles, the Rutulians and fierce Atinas
870 ran as well. The scattered chiefs and headless legions
looked to safety; horses wheeled in retreat.
None could hold against the Trojan onslaught
bringing death, none could take a stand.
Their unstrung bows on crouching backs, they shook
the pockmarked plain with horses at full gallop.
A murky cloud of black dust rolled toward the city.
Mothers beat their breasts along the lookouts
and raised their women’s shrieks to the high stars.
The first to burst in at a gallop through the gates
880 brought the enemy mixed in with them, and met
a wretched death right at the walls. They died impaled
on swords on their own soil, next to the very safety
of their homes. A group closed the gates,
scared to admit allies, or yield to their pleas.
Then came a wretched slaughter of the Latins, those
357

guarding the gates and those impaled on the guards’ swords.
Before the faces of their weeping parents,
some were thrown into the trenches by the
desperate stampede, some let go their reins
890 and wildly rammed the gates and bolted doors.
On the walls, trembling mothers strained to rain down
weapons on the Trojans, mimicking Camilla,
spurred by love of country. They used oaken posts
and fire-charred stakes in place of iron; they burned
to be the first to perish for their city’s sake.
The ghastly news hit Turnus in his forest.
Acca told the young man of the massive rout,
the Volscian ranks wiped out, Camilla dead,
the enemy’s assault, how Trojans swept the field
900 with Mars’ support, the panic at the walls. In rage
(as Jupiter’s cruel will demanded), Turnus
quit his hilltop ambush and left the rugged forest.
He was hardly out of sight, heading for
the plains, when Aeneas crossed the mountain ridge
to open fields and put dark woods behind him.
Now both were riding fiercely for the town
with all their troops, not much space between them.
At the moment that Aeneas saw the plain
smoking with dust and the Laurentian army,
910 Turnus saw savage Aeneas in armor, and heard
the infantry’s approach and panting horses.
Both would have tried their luck in war at once,
but rosy Sun had washed his tired team in Spanish
waters, bringing night as day glided away.
They camped before the town and built their ramparts.
358

BOOK 12

THE LAST DUEL

As soon as Turnus saw the tide had changed
and the defeated Latins looked to him to pay
his pledge, he blazed with new and ruthless courage.
Like a lion on the plains of Africa
who strikes at last after the poacher’s spear*
has pierced his chest—fearless, full of joy,
he tosses his thick mane, breaks the shaft wedged
in the wound, and roars from bloodstained jaws—
just so Turnus’ burning fury reached its peak.
10 Wildly he addressed the king. “There’s no delay
in Turnus, no reason for Aeneas’ coward band
to eat their words or break their pledge: I’ll fight.
Bring the offerings, father, set the terms.
Either I’ll dispatch this Trojan traitor* down to
Tartarus (let the Latins sit and watch!), refuting
by my sword the charge against us all, or else
we’ll be his slaves, and Lavinia his wife.”
Latinus answered calmly: “Peerless fighter,
your fierce courage outstrips other men’s.
20 So much the more I must reflect with care
on all the outcomes that I fear. You rule
your father Daunus’ land, plus many towns taken
359

by force. You have my gold, my goodwill too.
Laurentian lands and Latium have other
girls of noble birth. Let me speak these harsh words
honestly; take them to heart. I had no right
to give Lavinia to any former suitor.
All the gods and men prophesied this.
Conquered by my love for you, our common blood,
30 my wife’s sad tears, I broke all bonds, stole his
right bride from my son-to-be, and waged an unjust
war. You can see the battles and bad luck
that dog me since; you’ve borne the brunt of them.
Beaten in two fights, we can barely nurse
Italy’s hopes at home. Our spilled blood warms
the Tiber’s waters, our broad fields gleam white with bones.
Why go back and forth? To change my mind is madness.
If I’m prepared to accept allies once you’re dead,
why not end this conflict while you live? How would
40 your Rutulian kin and all of Italy
respond if I gave you up to death (may god
forbid!) as you fought to win my child?
Think of war’s uncertainty. Pity your old
father, forlorn and far away in Ardea.”
These words had no effect on Turnus’ fury.
It flared up, still more savage for being soothed.
As soon as he could speak, these words burst out:
“That care you have for me—kindly discard it,
best of kings, and let me trade my life for glory.
50 Father, I too fling spears with force; the wounds
that I inflict draw blood as well. His mother
won’t be lurking near in swirls of empty mist
to cover his retreat in an unmanly cloud.”
360

But the queen, aghast at this new combat’s risk,
ready to die, wept and clasped her fierce
son-in-law: “Turnus, by these tears, by my
honor (if it touches you at all)—you’re my
only hope, my sole relief in grim old age.
Latinus’ glory and his power, our whole reeling
60 house, all rests on you. I ask just this: don’t fight
the Trojan. Your fate in that duel’s mine as well;
I’ll leave this hated light of day with you.
I’ll never be enslaved and see Aeneas as
my son-in-law.” Lavinia heard her mother’s words.
Tears ran down her burning cheeks; a deep blush
warmed her skin and spread its fire through her face,
just like Indian ivory stained by crimson blood
or snowy lilies tinted red by a rose
bouquet.* Such colors stood out on the young girl’s face.
70 His love churned in Turnus. He stared at her, hotter
still to fight, and spoke curtly to Amata:
“I beg you not to send me off with tears and evil
omens, mother, when I leave for battle’s brutal
combat. Turnus cannot choose his hour of death.
Idmon, take my message to the Trojan king.
It won’t please him. When Dawn’s rosy chariot
reddens the sky, he should not lead out his men;
let Trojan and Rutulian weapons rest.
We’ll stop this string of battles with our blood.
80 On that field, Lavinia will be won as wife.”
He spoke and hurried to his home, calling for
his horses, happy as they neighed before him.
361

Orithyia gave them to Pilumnus as an honor—
a team whiter than snow, swifter than the wind.
The chariot-drivers stood around, thumping the horses’
chests, combing their flowing manes. Turnus seized
a breastplate stiff with gold and orichalcus.*
He strapped on his sword and shield and placed
the crimson-crested helmet on his head.
90 The god of fire had forged the sword for Turnus’ father,
Daunus, and tempered the bright blade in Stygian waters.
Then he raised the sturdy spear that leaned against
a giant central column, spoils from Actor
the Auruncan, and shook its undulating length.
“Now’s the time, my spear, now! I’ve never called
in vain. Great Actor carried you, now Turnus’
right hand carries you: let me strike dead
that Phrygian half-man, let me strip and smash
his armor! I’ll foul with dirt those waves of hair
100 dripping with scented oil and crimped with a hot iron.”
Such a rage drove Turnus. As he raved, sparks flew
from his face; his eyes flashed fire. He was like
a bull that bellows terribly as combat starts,
trying out its anger on a tree trunk
with its tusks, goring all the winds with wounds,
pawing sand as prelude for the battle.
Just as fierce in his mother’s armor, Aeneas
roused himself to fight and stoked his rage.
He was glad this mutual pact would end the war.
110 Then he soothed his friends and fearful Iülus
with talk of fate, and ordered that a firm response
be sent to King Latinus with the terms for peace.
362

As fresh dawn flecked the mountain peaks with light
and the horses of the Sun soared over Ocean’s
edge, streaming light out of their flaring nostrils,
Rutulians and Trojans checked the dueling ground
next to the walls of the great city. They put out
fire-pans and grassy altars for their common
gods. Priests in aprons, wearing sacred vervain
120 on their brows, fetched the fire and water.
The Ausonians marched up with their lances, spilling
out the crowded gates. From the other side,
the Tuscan-Trojan army rushed up with diverse armor—
and so much iron you’d think Mars’ own cruel strife
had mustered them. In the center, captains
milled around, proud in gold and purple:
Mnestheus from the blood of Assaracus, brave
Asilas, and Neptune’s son, Messapus
the horse-tamer. At the sign, each side pulled back,
130 staking spears in the soil, propping up
their shields. Women, unarmed crowds, and weak old men
came in an eager flood to fill the roofs
and towers; others stood by the high gates.
Juno gazed down from a hilltop (now called Alban;
in those days it had no name, no glory, and no
honor), looking at the plain and armies,
Trojan and Laurentian, and Latinus’ city.
At once, as one goddess to another, she spoke
to Turnus’ sister, queen of lakes and roaring rivers
140 (Jupiter, the high sky-king, had honored her
this way—after stealing her virginity):
“Nymph, beauty of the rivers, dearest to me:
363

you know I’ve loved you more than any other Latin
girl who’s suffered great-souled Jove’s unwelcome lust;
I freely let you have a share of sky.
Learn the grief—not caused by me—that waits for you.
While the Fates and Fortune seemed to favor
Latium, I shielded Turnus and your city.
Now I see him heading to an unfair death.
150 The day of death and devastation comes.
I cannot watch this combat they agreed on.
If you dare to help your brother, do it; you should.
Maybe better times will come for us who suffer.”
She’d barely finished, but Juturna’s tears were falling;
she beat her lovely breast three or four times.
“This is not the time for tears,” Saturn’s daughter
told her. “Hurry! If there’s any way, rescue him
from death. Stir up war and wreck the treaty
they drew up: I’ll take responsibility.”
160 She left her wavering, a harsh wound in her heart.
The kings rode out: Latinus in his massive four-horse
chariot, twelve golden rays around his gleaming
brow—the emblem of his ancestor, the Sun.
A snow-white pair pulled Turnus. In his hand,
he brandished two broad-headed iron spears.
From the facing camp marched out Father Aeneas,
founder of the Roman race, his star-bright shield
and god-sent armor blazing, and Ascanius,
Rome’s other great hope. A priest in pure robes
170 fetched a bristly boar’s young and an unshorn sheep
and stood the beasts next to the flaming altars.
The men now faced the rising sun, sprinkled salt meal
364

from their hands, and cut tufts off the victims’ brows.
Then they poured libations on the altars.
Pious Aeneas drew his sword and prayed.
“I call on you as witness, Sun, and this land
for which I’ve borne such suffering, and you,
almighty Father, and you, Juno his wife
(a kinder goddess now, I hope), and you, famed
180 father Mars, whose will inflicts all wars on us;
I call on springs and flowing rivers, all the powers
in high heaven and the blue-green sea: if chance
grants triumph to Italian Turnus, the losers
will retire to Evander’s town, Iülus
will leave this land, and Aeneas’ men will never
rise in war as rebels, or bare their blades against
this realm. If, however, victory favors us
(as I believe, and may the gods confirm it),
I won’t make Italians bend to Trojans,
190 or seize power. Let both peoples strike
a timeless treaty: equal laws for two free nations.
I’ll give you gods and rites. Latinus, father to
my wife, will keep his throne and army. Trojan
hands will build a town named for Lavinia.”
Next Latinus spoke. He looked up at the sky,
his right hand lifted to the stars. “Aeneas,
I swear by the selfsame land, same sea, and stars,
by Latona’s double brood and two-faced Janus,
by the Hell-gods’ power, the shrines of ruthless Dis.
200 Hear me, Father, you who bind pacts by your thunder.
I grasp your altar and I swear amid these flames
365

and holy forces: Italy will never break
this pact of peace, whatever comes to pass.
No force will bend my will, not even if
it pours the flooded Earth into the sea, and Heaven
into Hell—just as this scepter” (in his hand)
“hacked off in the forest, orphaned from its mother,
its leaves and twigs lost to the knife, will never
pour out tender shoots or shade, though it was
210 a branch until the craftsman wrapped it in wrought bronze
and gave it to the Latin lords to carry.”
With such words they sealed the pact as all the nobles
watched. Then they slaughtered sacrificial
animals over the flames, ripping out live
entrails, and piled the altars with the heavy plates.
But the Rutulians had long since thought the duel
unfair. They felt a tumult of emotions,
still more when they saw the unmatched fighters close,
still more when they saw Turnus step silently
220 up to the altar, eyes downcast as he prayed,
his face so young, his youthful body pale.
When Juturna saw more people muttering,
the crowd wavering and losing heart,
she rushed among the soldiers, taking on Camertus’
form—his ancestors were a great clan,
his father’s name was linked with valor, he himself
was fiercest in the fight—knowing well
what she must do and planting different rumors:
“For shame, Rutulians! You’d risk one life for all
230 of us? Aren’t we matched in strength and numbers?
See what the Trojans and Arcadians amount to—
366

plus the doomed Etrurians who dare to take on
Turnus! Our enemy’s too few for half of us!
Turnus goes in glory to the gods, whose altars
he’ll exalt in death. He’ll live on the lips
of men. But we, our country lost, will have to
serve proud masters, we who idle on these fields.”
More and more, her words inflamed the men.
A murmur started snaking through the ranks,
240 and the very Latins and Laurentians
who’d hoped for peace and rest from battle
now once more wanted war and wished the pact
would fail. They pitied Turnus’ sorry fate.
Juturna added a still greater spur.
She showed an omen in the sky, perfect
to muddle and mislead Italian minds.
Jove’s tawny eagle, flying in the ruddy light,
was bothering the shore-birds, a large and noisy
flock. Suddenly he plunged toward the water:
250 his vicious talons seized the noblest swan.
The Italians took note as all the birds
wheeled round in raucous flight (an amazing
sight), darkening the sky with wings, chasing
the eagle through the air until, done in
by pressure and his heavy prey, he dropped the swan
into the stream and vanished in the clouds.

The Rutulians hailed the omen with great shouts
and prepared to arm. Tolumnius the augur
367

was the first to speak: “I’ve prayed for this so often!
260 I accept the divine sign. Take up your swords
and follow me, poor countrymen, whom that foreign
pirate preys on like an eagle as he sacks
your shores. He too will soon fly off, sailing for
deep ocean. One resolve for all! Close up
your ranks and fight to save your deposed king!”
He hurled his spear and charged the enemy.
The well-aimed cornel shaft sang out, whistling as it
cut the air. At once, a mighty roar rose up.
Chaos in the ranks as all hearts boiled in tumult!
270 It happened that nine handsome brothers stood right
in the spear’s path, the sons faithful Tyrrhena
had borne Gylippus of Arcadia. It struck
one at the waist, where the leather sword-belt
chafed his stomach and the ends were pinned.
This beautiful young man, so bright in his armor—
the weapon split his ribs and splayed him on the sand.
His brothers, a brave phalanx fired by grief,
drew their swords or grabbed their iron spears
and blindly rushed ahead. The Laurentians charged,
280 then in response rushed in a flood of Trojans,
Agyllines, Arcadians in painted armor.
All felt the same desire, to let the sword decide.
The altars were stripped of kindling. A thick storm
of spears filled the sky, a pelting iron rain.
Wine-bowls and fire-pans were raided. Latinus
fled with his failed gods and broken pact.
Men harnessed chariots or vaulted onto horses,
swords bared, ready to fight. Messapus, keen to
368

end the treaty, drove his horse at terrified
290 Aulestes, an Etruscan king decked in a king’s
regalia. As he quickly backed away,
the poor man tripped over an altar, falling on
his head and back. Fierce Messapus flew in
on his great horse, his spear in hand; as the king
babbled in prayer, he struck him dead and said,
“He’s done. Here’s a better offering to the gods!”
Italians ran to loot the still-warm corpse, but
Corynaeus stormed them with a smoking altarbranch. Then Ebysus charged in to stab him.
300 The flaming branch, thrust in his face, set fire to
his beard, which gave off a scorched smell. Corynaeus
grabbed his frantic victim’s hair in his left hand,
kneed him to pin him down, and sank his vicious
blade into his side. Next Podalirius
chased the shepherd Alsus as he fled among
the front line’s swords. But as he raised his naked blade,
Alsus heaved his ax at him and split his head
down to his chin. Spurting blood soaked all his armor.
Iron sleep and cruel silence pressed upon
310 his eyes, their brightness buried in eternal night.
Pious Aeneas, head bared for the ritual,
stretched out unarmed hands and shouted to his men:
“What’s this attack? How can battle start again?
Control yourselves! The treaty has been struck, all
the terms are set. The right to fight is mine alone.
Let me do it, don’t feel fear. I’ll confirm
the pact by my own hand. Our rites owe me Turnus.”
But as he spoke these words, a hissing arrow
369

sliced the air toward him. No one knows
320 whose bowstring whirled it home, who brought
the Rutulians this honor, a god or chance.
The great glory of the act was stifled;
no one boasted of Aeneas’ wound.
When Turnus saw Aeneas yield, saw his captains
at a loss, he burned with sudden, eager hope.
Calling for his armor and his team, he proudly
leapt into his chariot and took the reins.
He raced along the ranks, sending many brave men
down to death, crushing others half-alive
330 under his wheels, grabbing spears to throw at those
who ran. He resembled blood-soaked Mars
in action, when he clangs his shield by icy Hebrus
to start a war, and drives his frothing horses through
the empty plain, faster than the winds from west
and south; Thrace groans under pounding hooves.
By Mars ride pitch-black Terror, Rage, and Treachery.
With such fervor, Turnus lashed his steaming,
sweaty team in the center of the skirmish, trampling
the defenseless dead. The racing hooves sprayed
340 crimson dew, throwing up the blood-soaked sand.
He killed Sthenelus, then Thamyrus and Pholus,
the last two hand-to-hand, the first speared through. He killed
Glaucus and his brother Lades, Imbrasus’ sons,
raised by him in Lycia. They had the same weapons,
fit for combat or to race the winds on horseback.
In another part, Eumedes rode to battle,
old Dolon’s son, renowned in war. His name was
from his grandfather, but his strength and courage
370

were his father’s—who once dared to claim Achilles’
350 chariot as a prize for scouting the Greek camp,
but Diomedes paid him in a different coin:
he no longer hopes to win Achilles’ team.
Turnus saw him far away across the open
plain, and transfixed him with a flying lance.
He flew up and leapt down from his chariot,
tall over the Trojan dying on the ground,
then planted his foot on his neck and wrenched away
the man’s own sword. He dyed the bright blade ruddy in
Eumedes’ throat. “See the fields of Italy
360 you fought to win—lie there now and measure them!
Such are the prized city walls for those who cross me.”
He speared Asbytes to keep Eumedes company,
and Chloreus, Thersilochus, Sybaris,
Dares, Thymoetes just thrown from his horse.
As the Thracian north wind howls over
the deep Aegean, chasing waves to shore—
gusts buffet the sea, clouds scuttle from the sky—
so the ranks fell back where Turnus cut a path,
and columns turned and fled. His momentum
370 carried him; his crest shook in the airstream.
Phegeus would have none of this attack,
these roars. Flinging himself at the chariot,
he pulled aside the bolting horses’ foaming bridles.
As he hung there, dragged alongside, Turnus stabbed
his bare flank with a broad-tipped lance that pierced
the two-ply chain mail. The lance stuck in the shallow wound.
Phegeus turned to block him with his shield,
pulling out his sword in self-defense, but
the wheel and spinning axle threw him to the ground.
371

380 With his sword, Turnus struck his head off

between the helmet and the breastplate’s upper edge,
and left the headless body on the sand.
While Turnus dealt relentless death across the plain,
Mnestheus, staunch Achates, and Ascanius
brought Aeneas into camp. He was bleeding, leaning
on his lengthy spear with every other step,
and furious. He struggled to rip out
the broken arrow, shouting for the easiest
solution: to cut the wound wide open with a sword
390 and find the buried arrow-head, then go back
to battle. Now Iäpyx, Iäsus’ son, arrived, Apollo’s
favorite. Once, in passion’s painful grip,
the god had offered Iäpyx his own skills and talent:
augury, the lyre, and flying archery.
But to stall his ailing father’s death, Iäpyx
chose to learn the use of herbs and medicine,
to practice silent arts that brought no glory.
Aeneas leaned on his huge spear, grumbling
bitterly. A throng of soldiers crowded round him
400 as Iülus grieved. He ignored their tears. Old
Iäpyx hitched his cloak and tunic, as healers do.
Quickly, he applied Apollo’s potent herbs
and potions. Nothing worked: not tugging at the arrow
with his hand, not clamping on the iron head
with a forceps’ grip. Fortune and the god
offered no help, and meanwhile battle’s horror crept
across the plain, so close they could see a wall
of dust. As the cavalry approached, arrows
rained into the camp. The awful screams of men
372

410 who fought and fell in the hard combat rose to sky.

Then Venus, distressed at her child’s undeserved pain,
plucked sprigs of dittany from Cretan Ida,
a plant of purple blooms and downy leaves
not unknown to wild goats struck in the side
by flying arrows. She fetched it, her face shrouded
in thick mist, and made a secret potion, steeping
the stems in a gleaming bowl of water,
adding an elixir of healing ambrosia
and fragrant panacea. Aged Iäpyx soothed
420 the wound, using this brew without knowing.
At once all pain left Aeneas’ body,
and the bleeding in the wound was stanched.
Now the arrow came out freely when he pulled.
New strength restored Aeneas to his former state.
The first to fire their hearts against the enemy,
Iäpyx shouted: “Hurry, bring the man his weapons!
Don’t just stand there! Aeneas, no human art
or doctor’s skill cured you, nor did my hand.
A great god did. He sends you to greater work.”*
430 Eager to fight, angry at lost time, Aeneas
sheathed his calves, right and left, in golden
greaves, and took up spear, sword, and breastplate.
He clasped Ascanius with chain-mailed arms,
kissed him lightly through the visor, and said:
“Son, learn bravery and real work from me;
from others, luck. My right hand is your
defense: it will lead you to great prizes.
Make sure to be mindful, when you are a man,
of the models that your family left. I
373

440 and your mother’s brother, Hector, should inspire you.”

With these words he left the gate, a great figure
wielding a great spear. Mnestheus and
Antheus and a dense throng marched with him.
The reserves all left the camp as well.
The plain trembled under tramping feet as blinding
dust rose up. From the rampart, Turnus saw them
as they came. The Ausonians saw too,
and felt an icy shiver. Juturna heard and knew
the sound before the Latins did. She fled,
450 afraid, as Aeneas raced across the open
field with his dark troops. Like a storm breaking
at sea, whose thunderheads approach the shore
as howling winds precede them; foreboding fills
the wretched farmers’ hearts, for the storm will blast
their trees and crops, destroying everything—*
just so the Trojan leader drove his men against
the enemy, their columns close-packed round him.
Thymbraeus killed great Osiris with his sword,
Mnestheus killed Arcetius: Achates killed
460 Epulo, Gyas killed Ufens: Tolumnius
the augur fell, the first to throw his spear.
Shouts rose to the sky, and the Rutulians,
routed in turn, ran across the dusty fields.
Aeneas didn’t stoop to killing fugitives,
nor those he met on foot nor horsemen holding lances.
Through clouds of dust he tracked only one man,
his challenge was for one alone: Turnus.
At this, Juturna, numb with fear, became
374

a warrior. She heaved Metiscus, Turnus’ driver,
470 from the reins, and he fell, hitting the beam.
Leaving him behind, she took his post, his voice,
his form and armor, pulling on the reins to swerve,
like a dusky swallow flying round the halls
of some rich lord, circling the high rooms in flight,
gathering tidbits for her cheeping fledglings
as she flutters through the empty porticoes
or by the wet rain gutters: so Juturna
veered through the enemies and all the plain
in her rapid chariot. Now here, now there,
480 she granted glimpses of proud Turnus, but steered him
far away, avoiding conflict. Aeneas tracked
her twisting course, chasing Turnus, calling for him
loudly through the scattered ranks. But every time
he spotted him and ran toward the racing horses,
Juturna turned the chariot aside.
What could he do? He was carried on a sea
of thoughts, none useful; his cares pulled at him.
Messapus approached, stealthy on his feet,
two spears in his hand, each tipped with iron.
490 He threw one with unerring force. Aeneas stopped
and crouched behind his shield, dropping to one knee.
But the flying spear still sliced off his helmet’s
crested peak. Then he saw Turnus’ chariot
eluding him again, and fresh anger at
Italian treachery rose up in him. Calling
Jove to witness, and the altars of the broken
treaty, he plunged into the heart of battle
with Mars on his side. Now he killed at random,
terrifying as he let his rage run free.
375

500 What god can help me sing of so much horror,

the great slaughter and slain generals, the men
whom Turnus, then the Trojan hero, drove over
the plain? Jupiter, did you want nations fated
for eternal peace to clash so violently?
Rutulian Sucro didn’t keep Aeneas long.
He stabbed Sucro in the side (the first fight
to slow the Trojan rush) and pushed the hard blade
through the ribs that hold the heart, an instant death.
Turnus unhorsed Amycus and his brother
510 Diores. He hit one with his lengthy lance
as he approached, then the other with his sword,
and hung both severed heads, dripping blood, from
his chariot. Aeneas sent Tanaïs, Talos,
and brave Cethegus to death, three at once,
and sad Onites, Peridia’s Theban son.
Turnus killed the brothers from Apollo’s Lycian
fields, then Menoetes of Arcadia,
whose aversion to war was no use. He’d fished
Lerna’s fertile streams, his pauper home unknown
520 to patrons; his father farmed on rented fields.
Like fires set in arid woods from facing sides
racing through the crackling laurels, like foaming rivers
roaring as they crash down mighty mountains
in their rushing course, blasting open
their own channels as they run into the sea:
so Turnus and Aeneas tore through the lines.
Rage boiled in them both. Without restraint, hearts
bursting, they used all their strength for slaughter.
376

As Murranus bragged of ancestors and ancient
530 names, all his race back to the Latin kings,
Aeneas whirled a giant rock and smashed him
to the ground, under the yoke and reins. The wheels
rolled him forward, and his horses, careless of
their master, trampled him with thudding hooves.
Hyllus charged with a huge roar; Turnus threw
a spear at that gold-clad head. The weapon pierced
his helmet and lodged in his brain. Cretheus,
strongest of the Greeks, your strength didn’t ward off
Turnus; Cupencus, your gods didn’t save you
540 from Aeneas. As the spear hit your chest,
your bronze shield offered one poor second of delay.
Aeolus,* Laurentian fields saw you die too.
You sprawled across the soil on your back—
you whom Argive phalanxes had failed to kill,
and Achilles, though he toppled Priam’s kingdom.
Here was death’s finish line. Your noble home
was near Ida, in Lyrnesus, but your grave
was in Laurentian earth. Now all the lines wheeled round:
the Latins, Trojans, fierce Serestus and Mnestheus,
550 Messapus the horse-tamer and brave Asilas,
the Tuscan legion and Evander’s Arcadians.
It was each man for himself with all he had.
There was no pause, no rest, in the ravages of war.
And now his lovely mother put a notion
in Aeneas’ head: that he should hurl his army
at the city walls and stun the Latins
with this new calamity. Tracking Turnus,
he gazed around and saw the town untouched
377

by the huge war, immune. The thought of greater
560 stakes enflamed him. He called to him the chiefs
Mnestheus, brave Serestus, and Sergestus,
and stepped up on a mound. The Trojan legions
ringed it, not setting down their shields or spears.
From the center, he cried: “Jupiter stands with us.
Let my orders meet with no delay, even
if this strategy is new. No holding back!
Today I’ll storm the town that’s caused the war, Latinus’
capital, and raze its smoking rooftops to
the ground, unless they surrender and submit.
570 Should I wait till Turnus deigns to fight
with me—a man I’ve beaten once before?
Citizens, this is the source and sum of unjust war.
Bring torches, quickly. We’ll reclaim the treaty
with our flames.” All of them, with eager effort,
made a wedge formation; the dense mass stormed
the walls. Ladders, torches, suddenly appeared.
Some ran to kill the sentries at the gates,
others showered spears. The sky was dark with weapons.
Aeneas himself, in the front and by the walls,
580 raised his right hand and denounced Latinus loudly,
swearing by the gods that he was forced to war
again, Italians again had broken faith,
turned foe. Discord broke out in the trembling town.
Some wanted to fling the gates wide open to
the Trojans and drag the king up to the walls,
some rushed to guard the ramparts with their weapons:
just like bees, when a shepherd tracks them
to a porous rock and fills it with harsh smoke:
disturbed, they scurry round their waxy camp
378

590 sharpening their outrage with loud buzzes.

As the black stench fills their home, the rock
resounds with humming; smoke coils in the clear sky.

Now a new misfortune struck the weary Latins,
one that shook the city to its core with grief.
When the queen, at home, saw the enemy
approach, saw the walls attacked, torches flying
at the roofs, no Rutulians defending,
none of Turnus’ troops, the unhappy woman
thought he’d died in combat. Pierced by sudden grief,
600 she cried she was the cause and culmination
of their pain. Speaking wildly, in despair
and set on death, she tore her purple robe
and hung a noose around a beam—an ugly end.
When the wretched Latin women heard this news,
first Lavinia tore her golden hair and gouged
her rosy cheeks, then the group around her,
insane with grief. The palace echoed their lament.
From here the tragic rumor spread across the city.
All hearts sank. Latinus tore his clothing,
610 stunned by his wife’s death and his town’s ruin,
fouling his white hair with filthy dirt.
Meanwhile fierce Turnus, at the edge of battle,
still followed some stragglers, but more slowly.
His horses’ skill now pleased him less and less.
On the wind came shouts of unseen horror.
He listened to the ominous low rumbles,
379

sounds of a city in distress, and cried,
620 “What great grief disturbs our walls? What’s this
uproar coming to us all the way from town?”
With these words, he seized the reins, frantic to stop.
But his sister, posing as the charioteer
Metiscus, still steering team and chariot,
countered: “This way, Turnus. Let’s pursue
the Trojans—we’ve found victory on this path.
There are others to defend the walls by force.
Aeneas is attacking the Italians;
we can inflict brutal deaths on Trojans.
630 You won’t leave the battle his inferior
in honor or men killed.” Turnus answered:
“Sister, I knew you long ago, when you ruined
the treaty with your wiles and joined the fight.
You don’t deceive me, goddess. But who wanted you
to leave Olympus and endure these efforts?
Was it to see your luckless brother’s brutal death?
What should I do? How can Fortune save me?
Murranus died before my eyes, calling out
my name; a great fighter, he fell to a great
640 wound. No one I love equally still lives.
Unlucky Ufens perished so he wouldn’t see
my shame; the Trojans have his armor and his corpse.
Should I let our homes be razed, all that’s left,
and not silence Drances’ insults by the sword?
Should I turn tail, and let this land see Turnus
run away? Is death so dreadful? Smile on me,
shades of the dead, since the gods are hostile. My soul
descends to you unmarred by cowardice. I’ve never
been unworthy of my noble ancestors!”
380

650 And now Saces galloped through the fighting,

his horse foaming, himself wounded by an arrow
to the face. He begged Turnus as he passed:
“You’re our last hope, Turnus! Pity your people.
Aeneas thunders in his armor, threatening
to raze our citadel and ruin us all.
Already, burning torches land upon our roofs.
We look to you. King Latinus is still muttering
about whom to call his son-in-law, which pact
to pick. As for the queen, who loved you most,
660 she’s killed herself in fear and left the light of day.
Messapus and brave Atinas stand alone
before the gates and hold the line. Legions press them
all around, a dense and spiky crop of swords.
Still you drive in circles on the empty grass!”
The image of these losses staggered Turnus.
Silent, he stood and stared. His heart seethed with
mixed emotions: shame and grief mingled with madness,
love driven by fury, and self-conscious courage.
When he shook the shadows from his mind
670 and could see clearly, he turned his burning eyes toward
the walls and city from his chariot, aghast.
A spiral flame was rolling up a tower’s stories,
billowing to sky, eating the whole structure—
a tower he himself had built with jointed beams,
set on wheels, and fitted with high walkways.
“Sister, fate has won. Stop delaying me.
Let’s go where Jove and heartless Fortune call.
I’m resolved to fight Aeneas, and ready
381

for death, even if it’s bitter—no more disgrace.
680 Just let me rage this final bout of rage.”
Leaping from his chariot, he bolted through
the hostile swords, deserting his sad sister,
and burst into the center of the fighting.
Just as a rock uprooted by the wind will tumble
down a mountainside after violent rain
or passing years have weakened its grip;
flying down the sheer slope, the ruthless boulder
bounds over the ground, bowling over trees
and herds and men; so Turnus flung apart the ranks,
690 racing to the city walls. There the earth
was soaked with blood; spears whistled through the air.
He raised his arm to signal, shouting loudly:
“Rutulians, now stop; Latins, hold your weapons.
The plans of Fate are meant for me. It’s right
that I pay for the broken pact alone; my sword
will decide.” All pulled back and left a space.
But when Father Aeneas heard Turnus’ name,
he left the walls and towers, breaking off from
all war’s work—not a moment of delay.
700 Exultant, he clanged his weapons grimly,
looming like Mount Athos or Mount Eryx,
or father Apennine as he soars skyward, joyous
when gusts rustle oak trees on his snowy peak.
Now they all turned eagerly to watch:
Rutulians, Trojans, and Italians, men on
the high ramparts, men with battering-rams below.
They all put down their shields. Even Latinus
was stunned to see great men from distant points on earth
382

meet and clash with swords: a contest to end war.
710 When a level space was clear on the field,
they hurled their spears and ran toward each other.
Bronze shield hit bronze shield, and the fight began.
The earth groaned as the two men rained down sword-strokes,
blow on blow, chance and courage in the mix—
like two bulls butting heads in mortal combat
on huge Sila or Taburnus’ heights;
the cowhands retreat in fear, and the herd
waits silently. The heifers wonder who will
rule the forest, who will lead the herds;
720 the bulls trade wounds with brutal violence,
locking horns, goring flesh, splashing blood
across their shoulders as the woods echo their grunts:
just so Trojan Aeneas and the Daunian hero
clashed with shields. A huge din filled the air.
Jupiter himself balanced a scale
and put the two lives in the pans to see
whose acts were doomed, whose weight plunged down to death.

Turnus sprang forward, seeing a safe chance.
He surged to his full height, raised his sword,
730 and struck. The Trojans and the Latins cried out
anxiously, on edge. But the faithless blade
snapped off and failed him. His only recourse was
to run. Seeing the strange hilt in his defenseless
hand, he fled faster than the eastern wind.
They say that when he climbed into the chariot
for battle, in his haste he left his father’s sword
383

and grabbed Metiscus’s instead. It served
him all the while he chased the straggling Trojans.
But when it came to Vulcan’s divine weapons,
740 the mortal blade shattered like brittle glass,
its fragments glinting on the yellow sand.
Desperate, Turnus looked for any way to get
away, tracing confused circles in the field.
But the mass of Trojans shut him in all round,
and here a huge marsh stopped him, there high walls.
Aeneas too, though troubled by his knees,
(the wound slowed them down; it was hard to run)
pressed his frantic enemy, step for step—
like a hunting dog whose barks threaten
750 a stag trapped by a stream or feathered cordon;
fearful of the bank and snares, the stag wheels round
a thousand times, but the nimble Umbrian
hound pursues him closely, mouth agape;
he thinks he has him any moment now
and bites, but his jaws snap shut on empty air.
Now shouts rose up in earnest. The banks and lakes
echoed the sound, the whole sky thundered with
the din. As he ran, Turnus chided all
his men by name, demanding his own sword,
760 while Aeneas vowed instant death to anyone
who helped, and terrified the trembling enemy
with threats to raze the city. He pressed on though wounded.
They raced five full circuits, and five in reverse,
this way and that: since they sought no small or paltry
prize, but vied for Turnus’ life and blood.

384

An olive tree with bitter leaves once grew there,
holy to Faunus and revered in the old days
by sailors saved from sea-wrecks. On it they nailed
gifts to the Laurentian god, and hung their votive
770 clothing. But the Trojans had chopped down the tree
without a thought, so they could fight on open ground.
Here stood Aeneas’ spear, wedged into
the stubborn roots by the force with which it flew.
The Trojan bent to wrench it free: he’d use
the spear to strike the prey he couldn’t catch
on foot. Then Turnus cried out, wild with fear:
“Faunus, please, have pity! And you, kind Earth,
hold fast that spear, if I ever kept your rites—
which Aeneas’ men have profaned in their war.”
780 He didn’t pray for the gods’ help in vain.
Aeneas, though he struggled long and hard
over the stubborn stump, could not pry apart
its wooden grip despite his strength. While he strained,
Juturna, again appearing as the driver
Metiscus, dashed up to give Turnus his sword.
Venus, outraged at the nymph’s audacity,
came and pulled Aeneas’ spear from the roots.
Spirits soaring, both men rearmed: one trusting
to his sword, one tall and fierce with his spear.
790 They faced each other, panting in the toil of war.
Now the king of great Olympus said to Juno
as she watched the battle from a golden cloud,
“Wife, what will be the end of this? What’s left?
You yourself admit Aeneas will reach
the stars and rise to heaven as the nation’s god.
385

What’s your plan, what hope keeps you in chill clouds?
A mortal man wounded a god: was that right?
Or that Turnus got his sword (I know you helped
Juturna) and the losers have new strength?
800 Stop, at last, and be persuaded by my prayers.
Don’t let silent grief consume you; don’t make me
hear again your sweet mouth utter sad concerns.
It’s over. You harassed the Trojans across
land and sea, you ignited awful wars,
you ruined a home and mingled grief and marriage.
I forbid you to do more.” So he spoke.
Juno answered with bowed head: “I knew
your will, great Jupiter; that’s why I left
the earth and Turnus. I didn’t want to. Otherwise
810 you wouldn’t see me sitting in a cloud alone,
enduring everything. I’d be in the front lines,
ringed with flames; I’d drag the Trojans into battle.
It’s true I told Juturna she could help
her distressed brother, and dare more for his life,
but not to use her bow and arrow. I swear it
by the river Styx’s unforgiving source,
the only oath revered by the upper gods.
Now I’ll yield and leave this loathsome war.
But I beg one thing,* not forbidden by fate’s
820 laws, for Latium and the glory of your
Latin kin: when there’s peace and wedding
celebrations, when they join in laws and pacts,
don’t command the Latins on their native soil
to change their name to Teucrians, becoming
Trojans, or to change their clothes and speech.
Let Latium and Alban kings last through the ages.
386

Let Rome’s children triumph with Italian courage.
Troy perished: let her name perish as well.”
The maker of all men and matter smiled and said:
830 “Truly, you’re Jove’s sister and a child of Saturn:
such waves of anger surge inside your heart.
Come now, give up this rage you honed for nothing:
I grant your wish, and willingly. You’ve won.
The Ausonians will keep their fathers’ speech,
customs, and name. The Trojans will subside into
mixed stock. I’ll add Trojan rites to local ones;
they’ll all be Latins with one language.
You’ll see a race arise from their mixed blood
that will surpass both gods and men in piety.
840 No other race will pay you so much honor.”
Agreeing to these terms, Juno turned her mind
to happiness. She quit her cloud and left the sky.
This done, the Father pondered a new problem:
how to drive Juturna from her brother’s side.
Men say there are twin plagues called Furies, daughters of
the dead of Night, born with hellish Megaera.
Night wrapped them all in serpent coils and added
wind-swift wings. They serve before Jove’s throne,
on the threshold of the savage king, and whet
850 the terror of weak humankind, any time
the king of gods devises vile death and disease
or terrifies a guilty town with war.
He told one to hurry from the sky
and cross Juturna’s path, an evil omen.
A rapid whirlwind carried her to earth
like an arrow springing from a bow, Parthian
387

or Cydonian, that races through the clouds
carrying venom, a wound beyond curing,
crossing the swift shadows hissing and unseen.
860 So rushed the child of Night, heading for earth.
When she saw the Trojan lines and Turnus’ troops,
she quickly took the shape of a small owl
that sits on tombs and lonely rooftops late at night
and hoots her eerie notes among the shadows.
The monster fluttered around Turnus’ face,
screeching, her wings beating at his shield.
A strange numbness left him weak with dread.
His hair stood up in horror, his voice choked in his throat.
Turnus’ unhappy sister knew the Fury’s shrilling
870 wings from far. She tore her hair and gouged her face
with fingernails, pounded on her chest with fists.
“Turnus, how can your sister help you now?
Should I give up heartlessly? But what skill
of mine could stall your death? I can’t fight a Fury.
I’ll go, I’ll leave the battle. Vile bird, don’t scare me,
I’m afraid already. I know the deadly drumming
of your wings. Great Jove’s proud commands
are clear. Is this my virginity’s reward?
Why give me immortality? Why can’t I die
880 as humans do? Then I could end this crushing grief
and follow my sad brother to the shades.
Immortal life is worthless: What will bring me pleasure
without you? What earth can gape open so deeply
as to send a goddess to the shades below?”
She said this groaning deeply, then draped her head
in gray-green robes and plunged deep in the river.
388

Aeneas was in pursuit. He shook his massive spear,
almost a tree, and spoke these savage words:
“What’s the delay now? Turnus, why retreat?
890 This contest is a duel, not a race.
Go on, change yourself to any shape, gather
all your strength and skill (such as you have), chase
the stars on wings, hide yourself in Earth’s deep
hollows.” Turnus shook his head. “Fierce Aeneas,
your hot words don’t scare me; it’s the gods I fear,
and Jove’s enmity.” He looked around and saw
a giant rock, an ancient giant rock set in the plain,
a boundary mark for conflicts over land.
Hardly twelve men could lift it on their shoulders,
900 such men as Earth produces now. But the hero
grabbed it in his hands and rose, then ran
toward his enemy and heaved the rock at him.
But even as he ran, even as he raised and
threw the giant boulder, he didn’t feel like Turnus
to himself: his knees couldn’t hold him, fear chilled
his blood. His rock, tumbling through the empty air,
didn’t bridge the gap, didn’t reach its goal.
It was like a dream, when drowsy sleep lies on
our eyes: we feel we’re trying to run, but somehow
910 it’s no use; we collapse weakly as we try.
The strength we know is gone, we cannot speak,
no words or sounds come out. Just so the awful goddess*
kept Turnus from success despite his bravery.
Then mixed emotions churned inside his heart.
He hung back in dread and gazed at the Rutulians
and the city, trembling at his coming death.
There was no place to run, no strength to fight,
389

no chariot to see, no charioteer, no sister.
As Turnus faltered, Aeneas saw his chance.
920 Raising his fatal spear, he put all his body
in the throw. No stone hurled from a siege engine
ever roared so loudly, no clap of thunder ever
crashed like this. The spear flew, a black tornado
bringing dreadful death. Hissing, it tore through
the breastplate’s border and the outer circle of
the seven-layered shield, and ran right through his thigh.
His legs folded, and huge Turnus crumpled
to the ground. The Rutulians leapt up groaning.
The hills and forests echoed their cry far and wide.
930 Humbly, Turnus raised his eyes, his hands,
and begged: “I deserve this. I don’t ask for mercy:
use your chance. But if a parent’s grief can touch you,
have pity for old Daunus (you had such a father
in Anchises) and return me to my people,
as a corpse if you prefer. You’ve won,
the Ausonians have seen me stretch my hands out
in defeat. Lavinia’s yours. Don’t press your hatred
further.” Fierce Aeneas stood there, armed, his eyes
roaming restlessly, holding back the death-blow.
940 And now more and more, Turnus’ words began
to move him and he hesitated—when high on Turnus’
shoulder, he saw the fatal sword-belt of young Pallas,*
the strap flashing with its well-known studs—Pallas,
whom Turnus killed when down, and took that emblem
of the enemy to wear upon his shoulder.
Aeneas drank in this reminder of his savage
grief. Ablaze with rage, awful in anger, he cried,
390

“Should I let you slip away, wearing what you
tore from one I loved? Pallas sacrifices
you, Pallas punishes your profane blood”—and,
950 seething, planted his sword in that hostile heart.
Turnus’ knees buckled with chill.* His soul fled
with a groan of protest to the shades below.

391

NOTES

Notes correspond to lines starred in the text.

392

BOOK 1: LANDFALL AT CARTHAGE
10: a man famous for piety: See introduction, page xx, and note to 1.220 for Aeneas’
epithet, “pious.” His piety, at least at the beginning, contrasts with Juno’s anger, and
provides an interesting play on the Iliad, in which it is Achilles, the mortal hero,
whose anger drives the epic.
26–28: Paris’ scornful verdict…her hatred for that race: Paris, son of Priam, King of Troy,
was once asked to judge which goddess was the most beautiful, Aphrodite (Roman
Venus), Hera (Roman Juno), or Athena. As a bribe, Aphrodite offered him Helen of
Troy, so he selected her, offending Juno in the process. Ganymede was a beautiful
young Trojan boy snatched up by Jupiter in the guise of an eagle to be his lover and a
cup-bearer in Olympus. Juno hated the Trojans in general because their founder,
Dardanus, was the son of Jupiter by Electra—that is, the product of Jupiter’s
infidelity.
41: the mad crime of Ajax: Ajax the Lesser raped Cassandra in her temple when Troy fell
and was punished for this by Pallas Athena.
42: Jupiter was also known to the Romans as Jove; the two forms alternate in this poem.
84: The Roman winds had names. Eurus was the southeast wind, Notus the south,
Zephyrus the west, Aquilo the north, Africus the southwest. In the original they are
referred to by these names, but after their first appearance (Aquilo appears only once),
the translation usually names them by their directionality instead, e.g. north, south,
and so forth.
118–19: In the Latin, line 119 starts with “arma virum,” the first two words of the epic, but
now in a situation less than heroic.
131: Jupiter calls in Zephyrus, even though Vergil has not mentioned his involvement in
the storm.
148–53: The famous “statesman simile” confronts us immediately with the forces of rage
(furor) versus piety (pietas), one of the major tensions in the epic—and in Aeneas.
Furor is also used of Dido’s love for Aeneas, Turnus’ rage in battle, and Aeneas’ fury
as he kills Turnus. Disconcertingly, Juno’s own furor (12.832) has driven much of the
plot of the poem.
156: In the description of the storm and the statesman, and also elsewhere—Hercules’
attack on Cacus in Book 8, the battle of Actium in the same book, and the war with
the Italians in Books 9 through 12—Vergil contrasts civilization/order with
barbarism/disorder, often employing images from the myth of Gigantomachy, as
Philip Hardie has shown in Virgil’s Aeneid: Cosmos and Imperium. But sometimes
the imagery reverses, as when Aeneas is compared to the hundred-handed Aegaeon in
10.565–70.

393

205–206: we make for Latium. There the fates / promise us rest: Aeneas assures his men of
rest to come, and Creusa echoes this positive prophecy by telling Aeneas that he will
find a happy situation in Italy (2.783). These two prophecies are contrasted with ones
predicting great war and strife, given by Jupiter (1.263–64) and the Sibyl (6.86–87).
They also omit mention of the great war Aeneas will have to fight in Latium.
209: he feigns hope on his face: This is the only positive use of a verb of simulation
(simulo) in the Aeneid. Aeneas here fulfills his role as a leader in encouraging his
men. Later, verbs of simul- carry the negative connotation of deception and trickery,
and it’s possible that Aeneas’ capacity to hide his real feelings may be troubling in
retrospect.
220: Pious Aeneas: Aeneas’ epithet, “pious,” is impossible to fully translate into English,
as noted in the translator’s note. For this reason I have left it in the form “pious” or
“piety” so that the reader will be aware each time this quality in Aeneas is evoked.
262–64: Your son will…give them walls and customs: Jupiter promises Venus that the
Trojans will impose their customs on the Italians and rule in Latium. However, this
promise is in direct contradiction to what he will say to Juno in Book 12, where he
agrees to Juno’s plea for Trojan ways to die out (12.823–28) and says Aeneas will
build his own town. While such inconsistencies used to be explained by arguing that
Vergil had not finished his final revisions, in Inconsistency in Roman Epic James
O’Hara has argued that we are meant to interpret them, not dismiss them. Jupiter tells
Venus one thing and Juno something else—who the recipient is affects the message.
What does that imply for us as readers of Vergil’s “message”?
271: Here it’s Iülus, Aeneas’ son with Creusa, who rules Alba Longa; at 6.763, it’s Silvius,
his son with Lavinia. The epic may be combining Julian and anti-Julian propaganda.
273–74: the priestess Ilia: the other name for Romulus and Remus’ mother was Rhea
Silvia, and her descent was from Silvius, not Iülus, so Jupiter’s prediction seems
aimed at pleasing Venus rather than telling the future.
285: Assaracus’ house will conquer Argos and crush Phthia and famed Mycenae: The
three Greek locations were the homes of prominent Greek heroes in the Trojan War,
Achilles, Agamemnon, and Diomedes; the general meaning is that Rome will conquer
Greece, as it did by 146 BCE.
286: Trojan Caesar is Augustus, not Julius, Caesar.
318: Huntress-like: Why does Venus disguise herself as a huntress in particular? We may
recall that she does have a prey: the wounded Dido-deer of 4.69ff. Iülus will
precipitate a war by similarly wounding a deer at 7.475ff.
343–426: The story Aeneas tells Dido (Books 2 and 3) bears an uncanny resemblance to
the story Venus tells Aeneas about Dido’s past.
367: Byrsa is the Greek word for a bull’s hide.
390–91: I have some news: your friends are safe: in fact, as so often, this prophecy is
overly optimistic, for we know Orontes and his men are dead. As Servius comments
of Venus’ line, “through this she shows that auguries for the most part deceive.”

394

James J. O’Hara in Death and the Optimistic Prophecy studies the overly optimistic
prophecies of the epic and suggests that the epic’s projection of the Augustan future is
itself such a vatic pronouncement.
407–9: Why trick your son so often with disguises?: Aeneas reproaches Venus for always
deceiving him by using false appearances. But in his flashback story on the Trojan
War, Aeneas speaks of how his mother appeared to him as she appeared to the other
gods (2.589–92).
450–52: to have more hope in troubled times: Aeneas, looking at the scenes of Trojan
defeat depicted on the Temple of Juno, feels relief and joy and believes they show
that the Carthaginians are sympathetic to Trojan suffering (1.462). His comments
foreground the question of misreading (and misinterpreting), as Juno hated the
Trojans. This has implications not only for Aeneas, but also for the poem’s readers.
473: before they tasted Trojan grass: Servius tells us there was an oracle foretelling that if
the horses of Rhesus tasted the grass or water of Troy, Troy would not fall.
487: Hector is singled out as Aeneas’ friend, as if to contradict the legend that they were
hostile to each other.
488: He saw himself as well: Most obviously and literally, Aeneas “mixed in with the
Greeks” is a depiction of Coroebus’ plan (as told by Aeneas)—a comrade who
suggested that they wear Greek armor (2.386–90). Beyond the surface level, it may
point to the legend that suggests Aeneas is the one who betrays Troy by siding with
the Greeks.
600: bereft: Aeneas tells Dido that they have nothing, but within less than fifty lines, he
asks Ascanius to bring and present to Dido luxurious gifts, including a veil that Helen
gave him, Priam’s daughter’s scepter, a necklace of pearls, and other jewelry and gold
(1.648–55). This contradicts the image of Aeneas fleeing for his life, leaving Troy
with only the Penates, Anchises, Iülus, and his wife Creusa. How did he get all this
material, including, of all things, Helen’s finery?
619: This Teucer is not to be confused with Teucer, the ancestor of the Trojan kings and
the reason the Trojans are called Teucrians. Teucer here is Trojan on his mother’s
side—the nephew of King Priam of Troy and the cousin of Hector and Paris—but he
fought on the Greek side in the Trojan War as the son of King Telamon of Salamis.
636: The gods rejoiced at the gifts: The line is corrupt in the original; I have provided a
reasonable translation.
710: This line is considered spurious.
752: Diomedes’ horses: Dido asks Aeneas to tell her about the horses of Diomedes when
they originally used to belong to Aeneas (Iliad 5.263ff.). Is this a little jab about how
Venus had to save Aeneas from Diomedes? Perhaps a little suggestion that Dido
knows more about Aeneas than she lets on.

395

BOOK 2: AENEAS’ STORY: THE FALL OF TROY
19–20: the massive / womb was packed with warriors and weapons: As Michael Putnam
points out in The Poetry of the Aeneid, the theme of hollow spaces in which violence
is contained, but only temporarily, is central to the poem, recurring with Aeolus’
winds, the Trojan Horse, and Cacus’ cave.
79–80: if wicked Fortune’s ruined / Sinon: Sinon’s “confession” contains a lot of
conditional clauses, with the result that he often speaks truth. For example, wicked
Fortune has not ruined Sinon, so the rest of the clause is irrelevant. Appropriately, his
name translates as “If not” in Latin.
112–13: this horse of maple / planks: What kind of wood the Trojan Horse is made of is an
unresolved matter. Four different types are offered: pitch pine (abiete 2.16), maple
(acer 2.112–13), oak (robur 2.230), and pine (pinus 2.258). Ralph Hexter in “What
Was the Trojan Horse Made Of? Interpreting Vergil’s Aeneid” suggests that readers
glide over such inconsistencies, filling gaps with explanations rather than
acknowledging them. Is this how we ought to read the discrepancies in the epic as a
whole?
116: Agamemnon sacrificed his daughter, Iphigenia, in return for good winds to Troy.
166: The fateful effigy of Pallas Athena was the Palladium, a wooden cult statue that
supposedly guaranteed the safety of Troy as long as it was physically in Troy.
285: But who so vilely mangled your kind face?: Aeneas questions Hector about his
wounds, despite the fact that he must have already known how and why Hector had
been mangled behind Achilles’ chariot. Servius suggests that Aeneas spoke of this
dream to appeal to Dido, who also had a dead ghost (her husband, Sychaeus) appear
before her with brutal wounds.
379: a hidden snake: An interesting simile. Aeneas seems to compare himself to a snake,
amid many negative snake images in the poem—the snakes who kill Laocoön and his
sons, the snakelike Pyrrhus, both in Book 2. In fact, serpent imagery winds all
through Book 2, lending an ominous tone to the activities of the doomed Trojans, as
Bernard Knox points out in “The Serpent and the Flame.”
396: mixed in with the Greeks: The same phrase as Aeneas’ description of himself on the
Temple of Juno frieze in Book 1.
558: he lies now on the shore: It is unclear how Priam’s corpse made it onto the shore,
since he was killed at the altar (2.550). Vergil may have been thinking of the fate of
the Roman general Pompey, or combining his version of Priam’s death with another
tradition in which Pyrrhus drags the body to Achilles’ tomb on the shore.
565–67: They’d all abandoned me: Aeneas appears to be the sole survivor of the warriors

396

mentioned in his narration. There is no one present who can either corroborate or
denounce his story of Troy’s fall.
568–88: The Helen episode: These verses were neither commented or quoted by any other
ancient commentator apart from Servius, who said that Vergil’s editors removed
them. As they seem on the whole misplaced and discrepant with the narrative, many
editors chose to disregard this episode entirely. Helen is described as crouching by the
altar and hiding, but if, as Aeneas suggests and Deiphobus later corroborates
(6.511ff), she was helping the Greeks, why would she be hiding and scared? In a
story told by her husband, Menelaus, in Odyssey 4, Helen helps the Trojans by taking
on the voices of the wives of the men in the horse and calling out to them, just in case
the horse contains soldiers.
643: the sacking of the city once already: Anchises refers to Hercules’ sack of the city after
he was tricked by its founder, Laomedon, who destroyed Hercules’ ships in port.
649: his thunderbolt’s hot breath: According to some versions of the legend, Jupiter struck
Anchises with lightning because he boasted about having slept with Venus.
721–23: This image of Aeneas leaving Troy with his son and father is as old as Greek
black figure vases, although the household gods (penates) are not shown till Roman
times.
741: I hadn’t turned….: As R.O.A.M. Lyne remarks in Further Voices in Vergil’s Aeneid,
“Vergil seems curiously disinclined to show Aeneas responding or relating to others”
(150).
781: Lydian Tiber: So named because the traditional origin of the Etruscans was in Lydia.

397

BOOK 3: AENEAS’ STORY: MEDITERRANEAN WANDERINGS
64: dark ribbons: Throughout, I have used “ribbon” or “headband” to translate the Latin
word vitta, a woolen fillet often associated with religious ritual. At Rome, it was worn
by priests, prophets, statues of deities, and victims decked for sacrifice.
75: The pious Archer is Apollo, who fixed Delos in one place as a favor to the inhabitants,
who had allowed his mother Leto to give birth there.
104: Crete…the cradle of our race: Anchises wrongly interprets Apollo’s prophecy
(3.94ff) to mean Crete instead of Italy, by tracing the Trojans’ ancestry to Teucer
(3.107–8) and noting the existence of a Mount Ida in Crete as well, instead of
identifying Dardanus as their ancestor. But outside Vergil, Dardanus’ place of origin
is also ambiguous: tradition traces it to Arcadia, Crete, the Troad, or Italy. Oddly,
Aeneas seems to forget that Creusa told him his destination was Italy (2.781). Like
Cassandra, she seems to have gone unheard.
213: Phineus’ home was closed to them: Phineus was a local Thracian king who had
chosen blindness rather than death as punishment for a crime. Helios (the Sun),
feeling scorned, sent the Harpies to plague him. They were eventually driven off with
the help of the Argonauts.
255–57: The Trojans are cursed with the future eating of their own plates, although the
Harpies’ grim prophecy is lightened by Helenus’ reassurance a hundred lines later. In
Book 7, while the Trojans eat their “pizza” of fruits on bread, Aeneas accepts Iülus’
exclamation (7.116) as a harmless fulfillment of the prophecy, which he wrongly
credits to Anchises (7.123).
302: a second Simoïs: Andromache has tried to re-create Troy in Italy; see 349ff. This is
precisely what Aeneas will not do; he looks forward rather than backward by the
second half of the epic.
303–6: Andromache worships Hector, her dead (first) husband, and weeps piteously.
Aeneas thus depicts Andromache as a univira, a woman wholesomely dedicated to
one man, though in reality she is currently married to Helenus and was Pyrrhus’
concubine before that. Aeneas may be indirectly praising the virtues of Dido, who
was known for her chastity and devotion to Sychaeus. Of course, this is a touch ironic
since Aeneas will be the one to lead Dido away from this devotion.
340: The son that your Trojan wife—: This is one of the half-lines in Vergil’s poem, and
here it works exceptionally well with the idea that Andromache is overcome by
emotion.
496: Of course the fields of Italy are not literally receding; Aeneas feels that despite all his
travel, he gets no closer to his destination.

398

712–13: Aeneas complains that the prophecies of Celaeno and Helenus left out his father’s
death and the pain it would bring him.

399

BOOK 4: DIDO’S SUICIDE
19: this one fault: See comments on 4.126, below.
65: But what can prophets know?: The Latin reads, “Alas for the ignorant minds of
prophets,” a striking line in its use of vates, poet-seer, for prophet. Vergil is a vates
himself—and so are Calchas in Book 2 and Cassandra and Celaeno in Book 3. These
are interesting models.
92–104: Juno, seeing Dido hopelessly in love, suggests to Venus that she should marry
Aeneas and that the Trojan empire should be set up at Carthage. Juno likes the idea,
because she opposes the foundation of a city in Italy by the Trojans. Venus agrees,
wanting Aeneas to be safe with the Carthaginian queen and knowing that Jupiter will
not condone this plan in the longer term.
126: a stable marriage: Juno sees their future union as a marriage, and uses the appropriate
language; Venus sees it as an affair. Dido is not wrong, then, when she also thinks she
is married; she’s merely on the losing side of the struggle between Juno and Venus.
But does the narrator take sides? Vergil says that Dido cloaks her “fault” (culpa,
4.172) with the word “marriage.” When Dido anticipates marriage with Aeneas, she
too uses culpa, but only to refer to remarrying and thus betraying the memory of her
dead husband. So what does Vergil mean? Is her culpa referring to the union as
marriage, or infidelity to the memory of her husband, Sychaeus, along with her
indifference to rumor, or even the trust she shows in him? It may not be an
answerable question; the text, as often, seems to offer us two versions of the same
event.
160–72: Aeneas and Dido take refuge in the same cave, and their marriage is ratified by
Juno. It appears that the true mastermind is Venus, who knows of Juno’s plans but
twists them for her own agenda (4.127–28).
215: Paris, with his retinue of half-men: Iärbas speaks of Aeneas as an effeminate easterner
in his clothing and perfume. Juno later corroborates this description in her comparison
of Aeneas and Turnus (7.321), speaking of Aeneas as both a wife-stealer and
unmasculine. Turnus is particularly eloquent on this topic, insulting Aeneas in battle
as a man who uses a curling iron for his hair (12.97–100). This ridicule applies to the
Trojans in general, as seen through Remulus Numanus, who, scorning the Trojans,
said they love to dance and wear luxurious garments (9.614–16).
261–64: Aeneas’ clothing: The description Vergil gives us shows that Aeneas is
comfortable with Carthaginian luxury. His wearing of jasper, purple cloth, and gold is
a sign of how much he has become Dido’s partner, and Mercury charges him with
“acting the good husband.” According to Jupiter’s speech to Mercury, Aeneas has no
intention of leaving Carthage, though he will claim otherwise to Dido after his

400

warning from Mercury.
288–91: to prepare the fleet without a word…and hide the change of plans: Aeneas
explicitly commands his men to hide the reason for rigging the ships (dissimulent).
However, when Dido confronts him with this behavior, using the same verb (4.305,
dissimulare), Aeneas claims that he hid nothing from her (4.337–38), a wholesale lie.
368: Why should I pretend now?: Is Dido asking: Why should I pretend not to care? Or is
she referring to a more sinister alternative, the idea that she was pretending to think
Aeneas was a great hero from the start, though she knew better? Again, the verb is
dissimulo.
421–24: Only you could catch him in an easy mood: Anna here is described as the only
person in the epic to know Aeneas’ innermost thoughts. Vergil may be pointing to an
earlier tradition in which Anna, not Dido, killed herself on a funeral pyre.
427: I didn’t exhume Anchises’ ghost: The ancient commentator Servius mentions a story
told by Varro in which the Greek Diomedes disinterred Anchises’ bones, which he
afterward restored to Aeneas under duress.
496: impious man: This of course alludes to Aeneas’ ordinary epithet pius, which Dido no
longer believes.
515: the warty love charm: Ancient lore had it that foals were born with tubercles on their
foreheads, which were bitten off by their mother, and that if this had been previously
removed, the mother would refuse to rear the foal.
528: This line is considered spurious and is not translated here.
541–42: don’t you / know or feel the treachery of Trojans yet?: This is the same sentiment
Aeneas expressed about the Greeks in his narrative to Dido. In Dido’s mouth it
suggests she should have known of Trojan treachery (as a national characteristic)
earlier, a possibility corroborated by her comment at line 596.
596: Poor Dido, do his impious actions touch you now?: There is debate over whether the
impious actions are Dido’s or Aeneas’. As John Conington remarks in his
Commentary on Vergil’s Aeneid, the latter is supported by Dido’s language at 4.496
above, and by Tibullus’ Carmina 3.6.42 use of the same term for Theseus’ desertion
of Ariadne. Those who wish to apply the impious actions to Dido argue that she had
no reason to think Aeneas treacherous when she offered to share her kingdom. But the
narrative invites us to speculate that she had, in fact, heard the most common version
of Aeneas’ actions at Troy—the version that spoke of his treachery.
625–29: This curse originates the enmity between Carthage and Rome. The unknown
avenger will be Hannibal. It also speaks of the war Aeneas will have to fight in Italy;
the parting with Dido will not be the end of the Trojan’s struggles.
632: Barca was the name of Hannibal’s family, here a nod to the future Punic Wars
between Carthage and Rome.
644: ashen and splotchy at her coming death: This is echoed almost directly in the
description of Cleopatra on the shield of Aeneas (8.709).
668–71: as if Carthage / or ancient Tyre were falling: The military imagery reminds us that

401

Carthage is, indeed, doomed to be sacked, and that Aeneas’ departure ensures this.

402

BOOK 5: TROJAN GAMES
69: The feast and funeral games in honor of Anchises in Book 5 were a Roman custom.
Vergil is also, as always, looking back to Homer; here, to the funeral games in honor
of Patroclus.
412: Your brother Eryx: Aeneas and Eryx shared a mother in Venus.
487: It’s unclear whether we should read Serestus or Sergestus here.
522–23: a sudden miracle took place, important / in the future: The meaning of this
slightly obscure passage seems to be that what happened here would later be
understood as an omen of future evil, but only after that evil had occurred. Aeneas,
however, interprets it favorably (5.530–31). Scholars are not sure what event is
referred to here; possibly Roman war with Sicily.
811–12: the walls I built: Neptune wanted to destroy Troy’s original walls because
Laodemon refused to pay the promised reward.
845ff: The account of Palinurus’ death at the hands of Sleep is somewhat different from
Palinurus’ own description of his death in the Underworld (6.347–62). There,
Palinurus also absolves Apollo of blame through a technicality. Apollo had promised
that Palinurus would make it to Italy safely, and he did in fact reach the Ausonian
shores, only to be killed by barbarians minutes later.

403

BOOK 6: A VISIT TO HADES
21: the Athenians who paid an awful price: The Athenians were required to sacrifice seven
young men and seven maidens to the Minotaur every seven years in reparation for the
murder in Athens of Minos’ son Androgeos.
29: a princess’ love: A reference to Ariadne, the daughter of Minos, king of Crete. One
year, one of the seven young men sent from Athens to be given to the Minotaur was
Theseus, with whom Ariadne fell in love. With Daedalus’ help, Theseus killed the
Minotaur and eloped with Ariadne, but according to most accounts, he later
abandoned her on the island of Naxos.
69–70: I’ll raise a shrine of solid marble: This suggests the Temple of Apollo on the
Palatine Hill at Rome, built by Augustus and dedicated in 28 BCE.
211: as it held on: Oddly, the bough does not break off as easily as it should.
348: No god drowned me at sea: Vergil shows us here the limited perspective of human
beings.
458: did I cause your death?: Aeneas expresses disbelief at both finding Dido in the
Underworld and realizing that he is the primary cause. This astonishment is odd, as
Dido herself tells him she will kill herself (4.321) and that her ghost will haunt him
(4.386).
460: I left your shores against my will: Vergil has Aeneas repeat a somewhat comic line
from Catullus’ poem 66, in which a lock of hair bemoans its departure from Queen
Berenice’s head. This would have jolted ancient readers as incongruous with its new
context.
476: tears and pity: As R.O.A.M. Lyne points out, Aeneas shows emotion after the death
of both Creusa and Dido. In this case he shows the very reactions whose absence so
much pained Dido during their confrontation in Book 4: tears, pity, consideration. But
too late. Repeatedly, Aeneas loses his chances for affective interactions with others in
his drive to follow his mission.
749: The shade of Anchises explains the doctrine of the transmigration of souls, which are
first purged, then sent up to earth to live in new bodies. The doctrine is already
present in Plato’s Phaedo and Republic; here it clashes somewhat with the more
traditional accounts of reward and punishment in the afterlife.
758: who’ll take our name: A confusing claim, since as part of her compensation for her
concession to Jupiter in Book 12, Juno wants the Trojan name to vanish.
763–66: Here the Roman’s ancestry is traced to Aeneas’ second son, Silvius, and not to
Iülus/Ascanius. Ascanius is cited as the ancestor of the Roman line by Jupiter (1.286–
88), in the description of Ascanius and his troop during Anchises’ funeral rites

404

(5.596–603), and by Tiberinus (8.48–49). This is significant because if indeed it is
Silvius who carries on the lineage, Augustus cannot claim ancestry with Iülus, who is
the source of the name Julius, as in Julius Caesar. The two accounts exist side by side
in the poem.
792–93: who’ll bring / a golden age to Latium: The Latin literally says “who will found
golden centuries,” using the verb condere that is so prominent at the beginning and
end of the epic and that I have translated there as “plant.” But to “found centuries” is
an isolated occurrence in Latin; usually this verb plus a period of time means “end,
lay to rest.” Vergil continues to play with the ambiguity of the epic’s foundational
verb, which both creates and destroys.
836–38: This one’s…That one: Probably Mummius, conqueror of Corinth in 146 BCE, and
L. Aemilius Paullus in 168 BCE.
847: Others…will beat out bronze: Anchises dismisses artworks within a work of (literary)
art, the Aeneid, suggesting that Vergil cannot share his view.
851: You, Roman, remember your own arts: These programmatic lines have suggested to
many that Aeneas’ murder of Turnus, who has already been defeated (marking the
end of the war), is in violation of his father’s exhortation.
893–98: There are twin Gates of Sleep: Aeneas’ departure through the gate of false visions,
right after he has seen the glorious future of Rome, has yet to be explained to
anyone’s satisfaction. One attempt to mitigate the shock value of this ending to Book
6 is to suggest that because Aeneas is not a shade (not dead), the gate’s falsity does
not reflect on him. But why did Vergil choose this gate in the first place? What does it
mean that this gate is a work of art, like the poem itself?

405

BOOK 7: ITALY—AND WAR
1: you died here too: i.e. besides Misenus and Palinurus.
37–45: Come, Erato!: The invocation to the muse Erato, the muse of love poetry, begins
the second part of the Aeneid—books full of war. Servius commented on this odd
choice, perhaps due to the fact that the upcoming war must be fought over a woman,
Lavinia (a precedent for summoning Erato may be Apollonius’ choice of the same
muse in Argonautica 3.1–5), perhaps due to the influence Venus wields in Aeneas’
fate.
46–47: ruled…in long peace: Yet Tiberinus tells Aeneas that Evander and his men have
been in a long war with the Latins (8.54).
99: They’ll raise our name up to the stars by blood: There may be an underlying meaning
here—they’ll raise us by the mingling of our two bloodlines, or, perhaps, by
bloodshed.
122–26: My father / (I remember!) left me with this fateful secret: Aeneas wrongly credits
Anchises with this prophecy; the true speakers were the Harpies (3.255–57).
190–91: to change him / to a bird: Vergil’s source for this story is not entirely clear. In
Ovid’s later Metamorphoses 14.321, Circe is in love with Picus, but not his lover. She
turns him into a bird because he prefers the nymph Canens.
236–37: many tribes and nations sought us for themselves: Not precisely true. Ilioneus
exaggerates the Trojans’ desirability.
247: a sacred scepter and a diadem: Aeneas now has with him not only Priam’s daughter’s
scepter, but Priam’s own scepter, and his crown. There is no way of explaining how
and when he received these according to his narrative in Books 2 and 3. The “traitor”
legend, however, has it that the Greeks gave Aeneas many treasures for betraying
Troy.
304–7: undeserving victims both: Athena had been permitted to destroy the Greek fleet for
the sin of Ajax, son of Oïleus, as noted above on Book 1.41. Servius tells us that
Peirithous invited all the gods but Mars to his marriage feast, and that Mars in
revenge made the Centaurs and Lapiths fight, with many resultant Lapith deaths.
312: then I’ll move Acheron: Freud used this bold sentiment, in Latin, as the epigraph to
The Interpretation of Dreams.
394ff.: They left home wearing fawn-skins…: This description of Bacchic “orgies” was
probably taken from a Greek source. The Bacchanalia were introduced into Rome
from southern Italy, but they were eventually linked with excess and depravity by the
Romans and suppressed throughout Italy in 186 BCE by a decree of the Senate.
606: and claim our standards from the Parthians: At the Battle of Carrhae in 53 BCE, the

406

Parthian general Surena delivered a great defeat to the numerically superior Roman
army led by M. Licinius Crassus. It was seen by the Romans as a crushing and
humiliating defeat, and there was later much propaganda made of the fact that
Augustus was able to get the captured Roman standards back in 20 BCE.
759–60: Angitia’s forest…will weep for you: For Adam Parry in “The Two Voices of
Virgil’s Aeneid,” these lines encompass “the sense of emptiness is the very heart of
the Virgilian mood,” part of what he calls the “further voices” of the Aeneid.

407

BOOK 8: AN EMBASSY TO EVANDER
40–41: the gods’ swollen anger is all over: Tiberinus’ promise is misleading, given that
Juno summons Allecto in Book 7—in sum, another overly optimistic prophecy.
46: Line 46, repeated from 3.393, is omitted here as spurious.
134–35: That Dardanus…was Troy’s first father: Does Dardanus found Troy, as Servius
says, or does he come to a city already founded by Teucer of Crete? This ambiguity
explains the confusion at 3.107 about the Trojans’ ancient mother. Servius calls the
claim about Dardanus a mistake.
141: Maia’s father: It seems most likely that Aeneas is simply fabricating this genealogy
by melding different Atlas figures from mythology, all in order to claim kinship with
Evander. Ironically, he engages in this fabrication at the very moment that he
attributes it to “tradition”—a narrative sleight of hand perhaps not unlike that of
Vergil himself.
146–48: Those Daunians that hunt you down: Aeneas misrepresents the situation.
322–23: The pun in the Latin cannot be rendered into English. “Latium” is linked with the
verb latuisset, “he had hidden himself.”
346: and swore that his guest Argus died right here: The Argiletum was a paved road
leading from the Roman Forum to the busy quarter of Subura. Here, Vergil parses the
name as Argi letum, “the death of Argus.” Evander, king of Pallanteum, received
Argus as a guest, but Evander then discovered that Argus was plotting to kill him and
take over his empire. Evander accordingly killed Argus.
404: Vulcan is so excited that he doesn’t finish his sentence before rushing on to the end.
He seems mostly persuaded to make Aeneas’ armor by the fact that Venus appeals to
his lust.
445: chalyb (khalʹ-ib): A metal forged by people who resided on the southern coast of the
Black Sea in the region of Pontus (10.175).
628ff: Aeneas’ shield: The engravings on the shield show Rome’s future (from Aeneas’
point of view), starting with Romulus and Remus being suckled by a wolf, then
moving on to the Battle of Actium, September 2, 31 BCE, in which Octavian and his
general Agrippa (representing the forces of order) defeated Antony and Cleopatra
(representing the immoral East, animal divinities included). The temporally last item
shown is Augustus’ triple triumph in 29 BCE, conquered peoples in his wake. The
events alluded to are Rome’s expulsion of its last king, Tarquinius Superbus, the
kidnap of the Sabine women, Horatius Cocles’ defense of a Roman bridge against the
Etruscan king Lars Porsenna, the Gallic attack on Rome in 390 BCE, the punishment
of Mettus Fufetius, a traitorous king of Alba Longa, and the Catilinarian conspiracy.

408

The shield’s Homeric counterpart is the shield of Achilles in Iliad 18, but that shield
shows generic scenes while this one celebrates Rome’s particular history and her
glory. Nonetheless, it leaves room for multiple interpretations, and parts of its
narrative (for example, the peoples mentioned bringing gifts to Augustus) would not
have occurred in Vergil’s lifetime.
679: the Senate, people, gods of sky and hearth: A variant of Aeneas’ list of companions in
3.12 (“with my people, son, and gods of sky and hearth”). Likewise, at 680, Augustus
is described as standing high on the stern, an echo of Aeneas at 10.260 (261 in the
Latin). Augustus on the shield is presented as a latter-day incarnation of Aeneas—
except that he is leading the Italians into battle. The slurs on Mark Antony (his
barbarian wealth, Egyptian wife, and half-men followers) in Octavian’s propaganda
are picked up on the shield, though they coexist uneasily with the charges against
Aeneas himself by Turnus and others.
686: hodgepodge troops: Actually, there were several hundred Roman senators on
Antony’s side.
704: Apollo saw this: This may be a compliment to Augustus, in whose propaganda Apollo
featured. The Temple of Apollo on the Palatine Hill was vowed by Octavian in return
for the victories over Sextus Pompeius at the Battle of Naulochus in 36 BCE and over
Mark Antony and Cleopatra at the Battle of Actium in 31 BCE.
709: pale with future death: A close repetition of Vergil’s description of the dying Dido at
4.644, reminding us of the connection between the two north African queens as
threats to Roman power.

409

BOOK 9: NISUS AND EURYALUS
121: Line 121 is considered spurious and is not included here.
446–47: Vergil’s words to Nisus and Euryalus are now part of the World Trade Center
memorial.
528: This line is left out of the best manuscripts.
547: Although it was forbidden: It is not entirely clear why Helenor was not allowed to
fight; perhaps due to his status, perhaps because he was too young.
613ff: Vergil rather boldly characterizes the Trojans (through Remulus’ insults) as
effeminate weaklings, as does Turnus.
777: sang of horses, war, battles, and men: Cretheus’ songs include “arma virum,” the
first two words of Vergil’s own epic. But rather than sing of war, he is killed by it.

410

BOOK 10: BLOODSHED, AND PALLAS DOWN
8: the Trojans and Italians should not fight: Actually, Jupiter foretold this very war when
speaking to Venus in Book 1. He also continues to intervene in the war even after
swearing by the Styx that he will not. Is there any sound moral ground in this poem?
12: when fierce Carthage opens up the Alps: Hannibal famously crossed the Alps on his
way to Rome in the Second Punic War, 218–202 BCE.
30: your daughter, still harassed by human swords!: Venus/Aphrodite was wounded in the
wrist by Diomedes during the Trojan War (Iliad 5.336).
113: Royal Jove is neutral: Jupiter swears that he will no longer interfere in the fighting,
but five hundred lines later, he seems to enflame Mezentius into entering the fray.
278: This line, identical with 9.127, is omitted in several manuscripts.
426: Lausus, no small part of battle: This wording (literally “a major part of battle”)
closely recalls Aeneas’ self-description to Dido as “no minor part [of Troy’s
downfall],” 2.6. The difference is that Lausus is participating in the thing he is “a
major part of,” while we are supposed to read Aeneas’ words as not implicating him
in the fall of Troy.
497–99: Pallas’ sword-belt, carved to show a wicked crime: The scene inscribed on the
belt is the story of the Danaids, who murdered their husbands on their wedding night.
This belt famously provokes Aeneas’ murder of Turnus as the closing scene of the
epic.
520: They’d splatter Pallas’ pyre with captive blood: Aeneas takes victims for human
sacrifice at Pallas’ pyre. Here his piety is certainly in question.
565–68: like Aegaeon: One of the giants who warred with Jupiter and the Olympian gods.
In this simile, Aeneas seems opposed to the forces of order.
872: This line is omitted as an interpolation from Book 12.

411

BOOK 11: TRUCE AND CONFLICT
82: They’d splash Pallas’ pyre: As he promised he would do, Aeneas commits the nefas
(unspeakable act) of human sacrifice. Human sacrifice was not customary and had
been condemned since Homeric times (see Iliad 23.176). According to Suetonius,
Octavian was rumored to have sacrificed one hundred senators and one hundred
equestrians after the fall of Perusia in 40 BCE, but Suetonius is skeptical.
133: They fixed on twelve days’ truce: In “Does Aeneas Violate the Truce in Aeneid 11?”
Andrew Carstairs-McCarthy argues that Aeneas violates the truce at 11.446 and
attacks the Latins on the eleventh day.
283–85: how forcefully / he hurled his spear: Diomedes is very complimentary to Aeneas
here, which may surprise readers who remember their duel in the Iliad, when Aeneas’
mother has to save him.
701: The Ligurians, though Italians, had a bad reputation for lying, fraud, and treachery.

412

BOOK 12: THE LAST DUEL
5: the poacher’s spear: the word I have translated as “poacher” is latro (in 12.7), which
usually means “brigand” or “robber” and is reminiscent of what Amata has to say
about Aeneas in Book 7.
14–15: I’ll dispatch this Trojan traitor: These words suggest that Turnus believes in the
version of the tradition in which Aeneas betrays Troy; the Latin is “the deserter of
Asia.”
65–69: Why does Lavinia blush and weep at her mother’s words? Does she love Turnus?
The imagery of heat and flowers derives from an erotic context, and the blood (as
well as the Latin violare, “violate,” here rendered as “stained”) points to what
happens to virgins on their bridal night—perhaps another reason Turnus is driven
mad.
87: Orichalcus was an ancient metal, second in value only to gold. It may have been a goldcopper alloy.
429: He sends you to greater work: This line echoes Vergil’s invocation of the muse Erato
at the beginning of Book 7, when he announces that he is turning to a greater work,
i.e. warfare.
451–55: Vergil’s sympathy for the farmers in this simile is an example of what R.O.A.M.
Lyne dubbed “further voices,” voices beyond the triumphant narrative of empire. The
further voices are particularly striking in this simile, which in context brings to mind
the Italian farmers and their destruction in war.
542: This Aeolus bears no relationship to the master of the winds in Book 1.
612–13: These two lines are omitted in the best manuscripts.
819ff: Juno makes her plea for the Trojans to “disappear,” and Jupiter grants it. Thus the
Romans could have their cake and eat it too: they came from legendary stock, but
they had no Trojan customs or values.
912: Just so the awful goddess: Jupiter thus uses the same means to end the war as he did
to begin it: a Fury. And yet Allecto was characterized as evil through and through.
942ff: An unsettling ending. Aeneas chooses violence over restraint, vengeance over
mercy, rage over self-control. The fact that Vergil chose this ending instead of a
resolution such as the return of Hector’s body in the Iliad and Odysseus’ homecoming
and reconciliation with Penelope in the Odyssey has puzzled readers for centuries;
some scholars use the abruptness of the ending as support for the idea that the Aeneid
was never finished. Pallas’ sword-belt, the trigger of Aeneas’ murder of Turnus,
ascribes a dangerous value to the power of art, which, as we’ve already seen, can be
misinterpreted and (here) used as justification for violence. In addition, the violence is

413

personal, not on behalf of the public good; in this, Aeneas is like Hercules before him
(when his cattle are stolen). This is noteworthy in the general Roman context of
Hercules as a hero of civilization, and also in the context of Aeneas’ learning to
subordinate his own will to a larger plan. It is also noteworthy in relation to
Augustus’ citing pietas in the Res Gestae as the driving force behind his civil war: he
had to avenge his father, as Aeneas here his ward.
Attention must be paid to the verb condo (here translated as “plant”), which
frames the beginning (1.5) and end of this epic. It was a difficult task to plant the
Trojans in Italy; but here, at the end, condo is the verb Vergil chooses for Aeneas’
murder of Turnus as he plants his sword in his chest (12.950). The act of foundation
is thus literally connected with violence, the two framing the epic. In another sense,
the epic is doubly framed by Aeneas and Juno, who have switched positions by the
poem’s end: Juno gives up rage and agency, while Aeneas adopts them—though
ascribing Turnus’ murder, oddly enough, to Pallas.
951: Turnus’ knees buckled with chill: As do Aeneas’ knees the first time we meet him in
the epic, 1.92. These are the only two times this phrase is used: Turnus is now the
victim that Aeneas once was.

414

BIBLIOGRAPHY

415

WORKS CITED IN THE INTRODUCTION TO THE POEM
Ahl, Frederick. (1989) “Homer, Vergil, and Complex Narrative Structures in Latin Epic:
An Essay,” Illinois Classical Studies 14:1–31.
Barchiesi, Alessandro. (1997) The Poet and the Prince: Ovid and Augustan Discourse.
Berkeley, CA.
Barthes, Roland. (1957) Mythologies. Paris.
Biow, Douglas. (1994) “Epic Performance on Trial: Virgil’s Aeneid and the Power of Eros
in Song.” Arethusa 27:223–46.
Casali, Sergio. (1999) “Facta impia (Virgil, Aeneid 4.596–9).” Classical Quarterly 49:203–
11.
———. (2014) “The Development of the Aeneas Legend,” in A Companion to Vergil and
the Vergilian Tradition, ed. J. Farrell and M.C.J. Putnam, 37–51. Hoboken, NJ.
Chiappinelli, F. (2007) Impius Aeneas da Omero a Dante. Tricase.
Conte, Gian Biagio. (1986) The Rhetoric of Imitation: Genre and Poetic Memory in Virgil
and Other Latin Poets. Ithaca and New York.
———. (2007) The Poetry of Pathos: Studies in Virgilian Epic. Oxford, UK.
Eliot, T. S. (1957) “Virgil and the Christian World,” in T. S. Eliot on Poetry and Poets,
134–48. London.
Hardie, Philip. (2014) The Last Trojan Hero: A Cultural History of Virgil’s Aeneid.
London and New York.
Harrison, Stephen J. (1990) “Some Views of the Aeneid in the Twentieth Century,” in
Oxford Readings in Vergil’s Aeneid, ed. Stephen J. Harrison, 1–20. Oxford, UK.
Horsfall, Nicholas M. (1979) “Some Problems in the Aeneas Legend,” Classical Quarterly
29:372–90.
———. (1986) “The Aeneas-Legend and the ‘Aeneid.’ ” Virgilius 32:8–17.
Levitan, W. (1993) “Give Up the Beginning? Juno’s Mindful Wrath (Aeneid 1.37).”
Liverpool Classical Monthly 18:14.
O’Hara, James J. (1990) Death and the Optimistic Prophecy in Vergil’s Aeneid. Princeton,
NJ.
———. (2007) Inconsistencies in Roman Epic. Studies in Catullus, Lucretius, Vergil, Ovid
and Lucan. Cambridge, UK.
Quint, David. (1993) Epic and Empire: Politics and Generic Form from Virgil to Milton.
Princeton, NJ.
———. (2018) Virgil’s Double Cross. Princeton, NJ.
Scafoglio, Giampiero. (2012) “The Betrayal of Aeneas.” Greek, Roman, and Byzantine

416

Studies 53:1–14.
Seider, Aaron M. (2013) Memory in Vergil’s Aeneid: Creating the Past. Cambridge.
Shields, John C. (2001) The American Aeneas: Classical Origins of the American Self.
Knoxville, TN.
Thomas, Richard. (1990) “Ideology, Influence, and Future Studies in the Georgics.”
Vergilius 36:64–70.
Ziolkowski, Jan, and Michael C. J. Putnam, eds. (2008) The Virgilian Tradition: The First
Fifteen Hundred Years. New Haven, CT.

417

WORKS CITED IN NOTES
Carstairs-McCarthy, Adam. (2015) “Does Aeneas Violate the Truce in Aeneid 11?”
Classical Quarterly 65:704–13.
Conington, John. Commentary on Virgil’s Aeneid. Most easily accessible online through
www.perseus.tufts.edu.
Hardie, Philip. (1986) Virgil’s Aeneid: Cosmos and Imperium. Oxford, UK.
Hexter, Ralph. (1989–90) “What Was the Trojan Horse Made Of? Interpreting Vergil’s
Aeneid.” Yale Journal of Criticism 3:109–31.
Johnson, Ralph. (1976) Darkness Visible. Berkeley, CA.
Knox, Bernard. (1950) “The Serpent and the Flame: The Imagery of the Second Book of
the Aeneid.” American Journal of Philology 71:379–400.
Lyne, R.O.A.M. (1992) Further Voices in Vergil’s Aeneid. Oxford, UK.
O’Hara, James J. (1990) Death and the Optimistic Prophecy in Vergil’s Aeneid. Princeton,
NJ.
———. (2007) Inconsistency in Roman Epic. Cambridge, UK.
Parry, Adam. (1963) “The Two Voices of Virgil’s Aeneid.” Arion 2:66–80.
Putnam, Michael C. J. (1965) The Poetry of the Aeneid. Cambridge, MA.

418

GLOSSARY

This is a full glossary of all the proper nouns in the Aeneid, and it includes much contextual
information. The line numbers are cued to the first appearance of the term in the text;
entries without line numbers occur in the Latin, but not in the translation, where a more
familiar term may have been used. I have reproduced Latin rather than English phonetics
unless the name is already very familiar, e.g. Ceres is here rendered seeʹ-reez although the
Latin uses a hard C.
ABARIS (aʹ-ba-ris): A Rutulian in Turnus’ forces who besieged the Trojan camp in Aeneas’
absence; killed by Euryalus (9.344).
ABAS (aʹ-bas): (1) A captain in Aeneas’ fleet whose ship suffers off the coast of Carthage
(1.121); (2) A Greek warrior killed at Troy whose weapons Aeneas dedicates at Actium
(3.286); (3) An Etruscan ally from Populona who aids Aeneas in the war against the
Rutulians and the Latins (10.170).
ABELLA (a-belʹ-la): A town in Campania known for its apple orchards (7.740).
ACAMAS (aʹ-ka-mas): A Greek, son of Theseus and brother of Demophoön; one of the
soldiers who hides in the Trojan Horse (2.262).
ACARNIAN (a-karʹ-ni-an): A Greek from Acarnania, a mountainous region in west central
Greece (5.298).
ACCA (akʹ-ka): An ally of the warrior queen Camilla (11.820).
ACESTA (a-kesʹ-ta): A city in western Sicily, originally named after Acestes, and later called
Egesta, but now known as Segesta (5.718).
ACESTES (a-kesʹ-teez): A king of Sicily of Trojan lineage, who hosts Aeneas and his men
after they depart from Carthage. During Anchises’ funeral games, he wins the archery
contest because his arrow bursts into a flaming omen (1.195).
ACHAEMENIDES (a-kae-menʹ-i-deez): A Greek crewman of Ulysses who is abandoned on the
Cyclopes’ island and later rescued by Aeneas and his men (3.614).
ACHATES (a-kahʹ-teez): A faithful companion of Aeneas (1.120).

419

ACHERON (aʹ-ke-ron): A river in the Underworld known as the “River of Grief.” It can also
be used as a referent for the Underworld generally (5.99).
ACHILLES (a-kilʹ-eez): The son of Peleus, king of Phthia, and Thetis, a goddess; the
grandson of Aeacus and the father of Pyrrhus, killer of Priam. The commander of the
Myrmidons, the greatest warrior in the Greek army at Troy, and the killer of many Trojans,
including Hector. Killed by Paris after Apollo empowers him (1.31).
ACMON (akʹ-mon): A Trojan crewman of Aeneas, son of Clytius, and brother of Menestheus
(10.127).
ACOETES (a-keeʹ-teez): An Arcadian armor-bearer of King Evander and his son, Pallas,
whom he treats as his own (11.30).
ACONTEUS (a-kohnʹ-te-us): A Latin who is thrown off his horse and killed by the Etruscan
Tyrrhenus (11.612).
ACRAGAS (aʹ-kra-gas): The Greek name for a coastal city in southern Sicily, which Aeneas
uses for direction as he sails around the island. Now known as Agrigento (3.703).
ACRISIUS (ay-kreeʹ-si-us): A mythical king of Argos and father of Danaë (7.372).
ACRON (aʹ-kron): A Greek ally of Aeneas; killed by the Etruscan Mezentius (10.719).
ACTIUM (akʹ-ti-um): A town and peninsula off the northwestern Greek coast; a place where
Aeneas makes landfall on his way from Crete to Sicily, and the site where Octavian would
defeat Antony and Cleopatra on September 2, 31 BCE (3.280).
ACTOR (akʹ-tor): An ally of Aeneas who defends the Trojan camp in his absence (9.501).
ADAMASTUS (a-da-masʹ-tus): An Ithacan; the father of Achaemenides, the soldier who is
abandoned by Ulysses on the Cyclopes’ island (3.614).
ADRASTUS (a-drasʹ-tus): A legendary king of Argos during the war of the Seven Against
Thebes; father-in-law of Tydeus and Polynices (6.480).
ADRIATIC (ay-dree-atʹ-ik): The Adriatic Sea, bordering Italy’s eastern coast (1.243).
AEACUS (ayʹ-a-kus): The father of Peleus, grandfather of Achilles.
AEAEA (ay-ayʹ-a): An island southeast of Rome; home of the goddess Circe (3.387).
AEGAEON (ay-jeeʹ-on): The hundred-handed giant who warred against the gods as described
in Hesiod’s Theogony; referred to as Briareus by the gods (10.566).
AEGEAN (ay-jeeʹ-an): The Aegean Sea, located between the Balkan peninsula and Asia
Minor; also applied to the sea god, Neptune (3.74).
AENEAS (ay-neeʹ-as): The hero of the Aeneid. The son of Anchises and Venus, leader of the
Dardanians, member of a royal house of Troy (1.92).

420

AEOLIA (ay-ohʹ-li-a): A group of islands off the northern coast of Sicily, named after their
king, Aeolus (1.50).
AEOLUS (ayʹ-o-lus): (1) The king of the winds; father of Salmoneus and probably also of
Misenus, a king of Elis (1.51); (2) The father of Clytius; a Trojan, killed by Turnus (9.774).
AEQUI FALISCI (ayʹ-kwee fa-leesʹ-kee): An Etrurian city, twenty-five miles due north of
Rome, located on the western edge of the Tiber valley adjacent to modern Cività Castellana
(7.695).
AËTHON (a-eʹ-thon): The name of Pallas’ warhorse; the name is also given to Hector’s
warhorse in the Iliad (11.89).
AETOLIAN (ay-tohʹ-li-an): A native of Aetolia, a region in northwestern Greece and the
birthplace of Diomedes (11.308).
AFRICUS (aʹ-free-kus): The southwest wind (1.85).
AGAMEMNON (a-ga-memʹ-non): The son of Atreus, brother of Menelaus, husband of
Clytemnestra, and father of Orestes; the king of Mycenae and supreme commander of the
Greek armies at Troy. Sacrificed his daughter, Iphigenia, to obtain favorable winds for the
Greek fleet. Murdered by his wife and her lover, Aegisthus, on his return home. Avenged
by his son at the order of Apollo (3.54).
AGATHYRSI (a-ga-theerʹ-si): People of Scythia who practiced the art of tattooing (4.146).
AGENOR (a-geʹ-nor): The legendary ruler who founded Phoenicia, whose capital came to be
Carthage. Progenitor of Dido (1.338).
AGIS (aʹ-jis): A Lycian ally of Aeneas; killed by the Etruscan Valerus (10.751).
AGRIPPA (a-gripʹ-pa): Marcus Vispanius Agrippa, a Roman statesman and military
commander, close friend and son-in-law of Octavian; second in command at the battle of
Actium (8.682).
AGYLLINES (a-geelʹ-leyenz): People of Agylla, an Etrurian city allied with Turnus (12.281).
AJAX (ayʹ-jaks): The son of Oïleus, or “Lesser Ajax.” The commander of the Greek
Locrians at Troy. Athena destroyed him and his entire fleet on their way home from Troy
because he raped Cassandra in her temple (1.41).
ALBA (alʹ-ba): A city fifteen miles southeast of Rome, destined to be founded by Aeneas’
son (1.271).
ALBAN (alʹ-ban): Of Alba (1.7).
ALBULA (alʹ-bu-la): The ancient name for the Tiber (8.332).
ALBUNEA (al-bunʹ-e-a): The site of a woodland and a fountain, or a sulfur spring, near
Lavinium (7.83).

421

ALCANDER (al-kanʹ-der): A Trojan killed by Turnus while defending Aeneas’ camp against
the Rutulian attack (9.766).
ALCANOR (al-kaʹ-nor): (1) A Trojan, father of Pandarus and Bitias by the nymph Iaera
(9.672); (2) The son of Phorcus and brother of Maeon; ally of Turnus; killed by Aeneas
(10.338).
ALCATHOÜS (al-kaʹ-tho-us): A Trojan killed by the Etruscan Caedicus (10.747).
ALCIDES (al-keeʹ-deez): A patronymic meaning “descendant of Alcaeus,” used especially
when referring to Hercules. Name based on that of Alcaeus, son of Perseus, who was the
father of Amphitryon and the grandfather of Hercules (10.321).
ALETES (a-leeʹ-teez): A Trojan who survives the shipwreck off the coast of Libya; ally and
adviser to Aeneas (1.122).
ALLECTO (al-lekʹ-to): One of the three Furies, daughter of Pluto, with serpents growing
from her head (7.324).
ALLIA (alʹ-li-a): A tributary of the Tiber River, on whose banks Rome suffered a disastrous
defeat to the Gauls on July 19, 360 BCE; this defeat gave the river an ominous name from
then onward (7.718).
ALMO (alʹ-moh): The first son of Tyrrhus, a Latin farmer; the first to be killed in battle
between the Trojans and the Latins (7.532).
ALOEUS (a-leeʹ-us): A giant who fathered Otus and Ephiates, who are perhaps most
infamously known for attempting to overthrow Jupiter. As punishment, they were confined
in Tartarus (6.582).
ALPHEUS (al-feʹ-us): A river and its personification, located in southern Greece (3.694).
ALSUS (alʹ-sus): A Rutulian shepherd who kills the Trojan Podalirius (12.304).
ALTARS: The name given to certain reefs in between Sicily and Africa that were a regular
danger to mariners (1.109).
AMASENUS (a-ma-seʹ-nus): A Latian river located east of the Pontine marshes, which Vergil
addresses as a god. Associated with allies of Turnus from Praeneste (7.685).
AMASTRUS (a-masʹ-trus): A Trojan warrior killed by Camilla, the warrior queen (11.673).
AMATA (a-mahʹ-ta): The wife of King Latinus and mother of Lavinia; she kills herself,
wrongly believing that Turnus has died in battle (7.343).
AMATHUS (aʹ-ma-thus): A city on the southern coast of the Isle of Cyprus, one of Venus’
favorite places, and the location of a temple dedicated to her honor (10.51).
AMAZONS (aʹ-ma-zons): A storied nation of women, led by Penthesilea, who comes from
somewhere in the north. Legend holds that they invaded Phrygia in Asia Minor (1.491).

422

AMITERNUM (a-mi-terʹ-num): A Sabine city in central Italy whose contingent is allied with
Turnus and led by Clausus (7.710).
AMPHITRYON (am-fiʹ-tri-on): The husband of Alcmena and a cuckold by Jupiter. The
supposed father of Jupiter and Alcmena’s son, Hercules.
AMSANCTUS (am-sankʹ-tus): A sulfurous lake and valley located east of Naples in the
territory of the Samnites, known as a breathing vent for the God of Death and an entrance
into the Underworld (7.565).
AMYCLAE (a-meeʹ-klay): A town in Latium, located between Caieta and Anxur and ruled by
the Camers (10.564).
AMYCUS (aʹ-mi-kus): (1) A Trojan ally of Aeneas who is reported missing in the shipwreck
off the Libyan coast (1.221); (2) A prominent Trojan during the Trojan War and later the
king of Bebrycia in Bithynia, Asia Minor. A renowned boxer, he is ultimately defeated by
Pollux (5.373); (3) A Trojan ally of Aeneas, expert hunter, and defender of the Trojan
camp against the Rutulian attack; killed by Turnus (9.772); (4) A Trojan, father of Aeneas’
ally Mimas, by the Trojan Theano; killed by Mezentius (10.703); (5) A Trojan, brother of
Diores, killed by Turnus, perhaps the same person as Amycus (1) (12.509).
ANAGNIA (a-nagʹ-ni-a): A town in Latium, east of Rome, that provides troops allied with
Turnus’ forces (7.685).
ANCHEMOLUS (an-keʹ-mo-lus): The son of Rhoteus, king of the Marsi; had incestuous
relations with his stepmother and fled to Turnus’ side; killed by Pallas (10.388).
ANCHISES (an-kaiʹ-seez): A Trojan of royal blood, father of Aeneas by the goddess Venus,
grandson of Assaracus, son of Capys, and second cousin of Priam. Dies on Sicily en route
from Troy to Latium (1.618).
ANCUS (anʹ-kus): Ancus Martius, the fourth king of Rome, according to tradition (6.815).
ANDROGEOS (an-droʹ-ge-os): (1) A Greek captain killed during the sack of Troy (2.371); (2)
The son of Minos, King of Crete, who is murdered by the Athenians. As restitution, King
Minos demanded the Athenians to offer seven boys and seven girls to the Minotaur
annually, to be eaten (6.20).
ANDROMACHE (an-droʹ-ma-kee): The wife of Hector, then of Pyrrhus, then of the prophet
Helenus; daughter of Eetion and mother by Hector of Astyanax. After the fall of Troy she
was given to Achilles’ son Pyrrhus/Neoptolemus as a spoil of war. Once Pyrrhus was
murdered by Agamemnon’s son Orestes, she married Helenus, and together they ruled over
the kingdom of Epirus (2.455).
ANGITIA (an-giʹ-ti-a): A sorceress who is generally associated with snake charming; her
name may in fact mean “snake.” She is the sister of Medea and also possibly the same
person. A revered goddess of the Marsi people (7.759).

423

ANIO (aʹ-ni-o): A tributary of the Tiber River that passes through the Sabine region of
central Italy (7.683).
ANIUS (aʹ-ni-us): A priest of Apollo and the king of the island Delos, who shows a warm
welcome to Aeneas and his crew upon their flight from Troy (3.80).
ANNA (anʹ-na): The sister and close companion of Dido. Sent by Dido to persuade Aeneas
not to leave Carthage (4.9).
ANTAEUS (an-tayʹ-us): A Latin ally of Turnus; killed by Aeneas (10.562).
ANTANDROS (an-tanʹ-dros): A town in Asia Minor, near Troy, under the Phrygian Mount
Ida, where Aeneas compiles his fleet (3.6).
ANTEMNAE (an-temʹ-nay): A Sabine town in central Italy located at the junction of the Tiber
and Anio rivers. Later conquered by Romulus (7.631).
ANTENOR (an-teʹ-nor): A nephew of Priam who escaped during the fall of Troy; reached
Italy prior to Aeneas and founded Patavium, now known as Padua (1.242).
ANTHEUS (anʹ-theus): A Trojan, son of Sarpedon, and an ally of Aeneas. He captains one of
the ships that is wrecked off the coast of Libya (1.182).
ANTIPHATES (an-tiʹ-fa-teez): A Trojan ally of Aeneas who is killed by Turnus (9.696).
ANTONY (anʹ-toh-nee): Marc Antony, historical figure (ca. 82–30 BCE). Assigned by the
second Triumvir to rule the eastern Roman Empire. Fell in love with Cleopatra, the queen
of Egypt, and staged a war against Octavian for mastery of Rome. Ultimately was defeated
at Actium, where he and Cleopatra committed suicide (8.685).
ANTORES (an-tohʹ-reez): Hercules’ aide, Evander’s affiliate, and Aeneas’ ally (10.778).
ANUBIS (a-nooʹ-bis): An Egyptian god who is typically portrayed as having a human’s body
and a dog’s or a jackal’s head. He is the protector of tombs and part of Cleopatra’s retinue
at Actium (8.699).
ANXUR (anksʹ-oor): (1) A coastal town of Volscians in southern Latium, also referred to as
Terracina, and the site of a grove that Jupiter presided over; (2) A Rutulian ally of Turnus
who is killed by Aeneas (10.546).
APENNINE (apʹ-e-nyne): Of the mountain range in central Italy called the Apennines,
referred to as Father by Italians (11.699).
APHIDNUS (a-feedʹ-nus): A Trojan who defended the Trojan camp in Aeneas’ absence;
killed by Turnus (9.703).
APOLLO (a-polʹ-loh): One of the twelve Olympian gods, the god of light, the arts, and
medicine. Son of Jupiter and Latona (Leto), twin brother of Diana, born at Delos. Allied
with the Trojans during the Trojan War and, in Vergil’s description, is said to have

424

presided as Augustus’ patron divinity over the battle at Actium. Also referred to as
Phoebus (1.329).
AQUICULUS (a-kweeʹ-cu-lus): A Rutulian who attacks the Trojan camp in Aeneas’ absence
and is stopped at the gates (9.685).
ARAXES (a-rakʹ-seez): An Armenian river (8.728).
ARCADIANS (ar-kayʹ-di-anz): The occupants of Arcadia, a mountainous territory in the
central Peloponnese and the birthplace of King Evander (5.299).
ARCENS (arʹ-kens): A Sicilian whose unnamed son is killed fighting for Aeneas (9.581).
ARCETIUS (ar-ketʹ-i-us): A Rutulian who is killed by Mnestheus, one of Aeneas’ captains
(12.459).
ARCHIPPUS (ar-kipʹ-pus): A Marsian king whose troops were killed while aiding Turnus’
forces (7.751).
ARCTURUS (ark-tooʹ-rus): The brightest star in the constellation known as Bootes, or the
Wagon. It rises in stormy weather, particularly during the spring rains (1.744).
ARDEA (arʹ-de-a): The Rutulian capital. Located south of Rome, it is the birthplace and
home of Turnus (7.412).
ARETHUSA (a-re-thooʹ-sa): A fountain in Syracuse that is rumored to take its water from the
Alpheus River in Greece. The legend holds that Alpheus, god of the river which is his
namesake, fell in love with the nymph Arethusa when she was bathing in it one day, and
chased her all the way to Italy (3.696).
ARGILETUM (ar-gi-leʹ-tum): A district of northern Rome that Vergil maintains was named
after a certain Argus, one of Evander’s guests, who was put to death here (letum) for
treachery; regarding the name of the district, it is more likely that it was related to the word
for clay, argilla (8.345).
ARGIVE (arʹ-give): Greek, more specifically from Argos or favoring Argos (1.40).
ARGOS (arʹ-gos): An area in the northern Peloponnese loved by Juno. Also used as a
referent for the Greek people, in the form Argive (1.285).
ARGUS (arʹ-gus): (1) The hundred-eyed monster commanded by Juno to guard the beautiful
nymph Io after Juno turned her into a heifer (7.791); (2) Evander’s guest who was killed at
Argiletum for plotting treachery (8.346).
ARGYRIPA (ar-giʹ-ri-pa): Also known as Arpi. City established by Diomedes in Apulia, the
heel of the boot of Italy (11.246).
ARICIA (a-reeʹ-ki-a): Virbius’ mother, a nymph (7.762).
ARISBA (a-reezʹ-bah): A city on the Troad peninsula north of Troy; in the Iliad, it is said to

425

have sent additional forces to assist Troy (9.264).
ARPI (arʹ-pee): A city in Apulia, also known as Argyripa (10.29).
ARRUNS (arʹ-runz): An Etruscan, allied with Aeneas, who killed Camilla, the warrior virgin
(11.759).
ASBYTES (as-byeʹ-teez): A Trojan who was killed by Turnus (12.362).
ASCANIUS (as-kayʹ-ni-us): Son of Aeneas and Creusa, grandson of Anchises. After the fall
of Troy his name changed from Ilus to Iülus to establish him as a member of the house of
Iulius and an ancestor of Julius Caesar and his adopted son Octavian/Augustus (1.267).
ASIA: In Latin, Asia Minor and its western coast. The name was originally that of a town in
Lydia, a Bronze Age kingdom in western Asia Minor.
ASILAS (a-seeʹ-las): (1) A Rutulian soldier who kills the Trojan Corynaeus (9.572); (2) An
Etruscan general and oracle who comes to Aeneas’ aid (10.175).
ASIUS (aʹ-si-us): A Trojan who defends Aeneas’ camp (10.123).
ASSARACUS (as-saʹ-ra-kus): An early king of Troy; brother of Ilus and Ganymede, son of
Tros, father of Capys, grandfather of Anchises, and great-grandfather of Aeneas (1.284).
ASTYANAX (as-teeʹ-a-naks): The infant son of Hector by Andromache, his Greek name
meaning “Lord of the City.” Thrown to his death off the walls of Troy at Pyrrhus’
command (2.457).
ASTYR (aʹ-stir): An Etruscan ally of Aeneas (10.181).
ATHENA (a-theeʹ-na): The warrior daughter of Jupiter, also known as Minerva, Pallas, and
Tritonian (1.480).
ATHESIS (a-theeʹ-sis): The Adige, a river in northern Italy (9.680).
ATHOS (aʹ-thohs): A mountain in Macedonia located on a peninsula jutting into the
northern Aegean Sea (12.701).
ATINA (a-teeʹ-na): An Italian town southeast of Rome whose people were Volscians; its
name is unchanged today (7.630).
ATINAS (a-teeʹ-nas): A Rutulian leader, who was stopped with others of Turnus’ allies at
Aeneas’ gates (11.869).
ATLAS (atʹ-las): Father of the Pleiades, the seven sisters who are Artemis’ companions; the
Titan condemned to support the world on his shoulders before being transformed into
Mount Atlas in northern Africa, near Carthage (1.741).
ATREUS (aʹ-trey-us): Father of Agamemnon and Menelaus, and king of Mycenae; son of
Pelops, grandson of Tantalus, and brother of Thyestes (1.457).

426

ATYS (ahʹ-tis): A young Trojan and close friend of Iülus. By making Atys the progenitor of
the house of Atia, Vergil foretells the relationship between Augustus, whose mother was of
the house of Atia, and Julius Caesar, who was of the house of Iulia (5.567).
AUFIDUS (awʹ-fi-dus): A river in Apulia, on the heel of Italy’s boot, that flows into the
Adriatic (11.405).
AUGUSTUS (aw-gusʹ-tus): A title given to emperors of Rome. First awarded in 27 BCE to
the first Roman emperor, Octavius Caesar, who was the grand-nephew of Julius Caesar and
was adopted as his son (6.792).
AULESTES (aw-lesʹ-teez): An Etruscan captain, ally of Aeneas; pilots the Triton (10.207).
AULIS (awʹlis): A port in the strait between Euboea and the Greek mainland, where the
Greek forces assembled before their departure to Troy. Infamous for being the spot where
Agamemnon sacrificed his daughter, Iphigenia, so as to receive favorable winds by which
he and his fleet could sail to Troy (4.425).
AUNUS (awʹ-nus): A Ligurian whose son is killed by Camilla (11.699).
AURORA (aw-rohʹ-ra): An alternative name for the goddess Dawn, mother of Memnon; she
is also called Eoas.
AURUNCANS (aw-runʹ-kanz): Original inhabitants of the Italian peninsula, named after
Aurunca, a town in Campania (7.207).
AUSONIAN (aw-sohʹ-ni-an): (1) Of southern Italy, which is also called Ausonia (7.328); (2)
An inhabitant of Italy (not necessarily Ausonia) (9.639).
AUTOMEDON (aw-tomʹ-e-don): Achilles’ armor-bearer and charioteer; in some versions, that
of Pyrrhus as well (2.477).
AVENTINUS (a-ven-tyeʹ-nus): (1) A son of Hercules by a priestess, Rhea, and the namesake
of the hill (7.655); (2) The Aventine Hill, one of the seven hills in Rome (7.660).
AVERNUS (a-verʹ-nus): A lake in a volcanic crater between Cumae and Naples; the name
means “birdless” or “over which birds will not fly,” because its fumes were thought fatal to
birds. Located near a legendary entrance to the Underworld, it is often taken as a synonym
for the Underworld (3.386).
BACCHANTS (bak-kantzʹ): The female worshippers of the god Bacchus (to the Greeks,
Dionysus). They would roam the mountains and forests in rapturous devotion to their god’s
rites. Known in Greek as Maenads, literally “madwomen” (3.125).
BACCHUS (bakʹ-kus): The god of wine and pleasure, son of Jupiter and Semele. Also known
as Lyaeus, Liber (both derivatives of the verb “liberate”), and in Greek, Dionysus (1.734).
BACTRA (bakʹ-tra): A remote region that existed in what is now northern Afghanistan. On
the shield of Aeneas, it sends troops for Antony and Cleopatra (8.688).

427

BAIAE (bayʹ-ay): A resort town known for its hot springs, near modern-day Naples. It was
the home to luxurious villas that were constructed on piers protruding over water (9.710).
BARCAN (barʹ-kan): A member of the Libyan tribe that occupied the north African city of
Barce (4.42).
BARCE (barʹ-ke): Dido’s attendant and the nurse of her deceased husband, Sychaeus
(4.632).
BATULUM (baʹ-tu-lum): A city in Campania, built by the Samnites, and allied with Turnus’
forces (7.739).
BEARS: Ursa Major and Minor, also known as the Big and Little Dippers (1.744).
BEBRYCIAN (be-briʹ-ki-an): A citizen of Bebrycia, a territory in northern Asia Minor
(5.372).
BELLONA (bel-loʹ-na): The Roman goddess of war and consort of Mars (7.319).
BELUS (beʹ-lus): (1) The father of Dido (1.621); (2) The father of the Tyrians (1.729); (3)
The father of Palamedes and, Vergil claims, of Danaus and Aegyptus, and king of Egypt
(2.82).
BENACUS (be-naʹ-kus): The personification of a lake in the region of Verona in northern
Italy, where the Minicius River finds its source. Also called “Father Benacus” (10.205).
BERECYNTHIAN (be-re-kinʹ-thi-an): Of a rugged Phrygian territory, Asia Minor, known for
being holy to the “Great Mother” of the gods, Cybele.
BEROË (beʹ-roh-e): The aged wife of Doryclus the Rutulian, who is impersonated by Iris
during one of Juno’s attempts to wipe out Aeneas’ troops (5.620).
BITIAS (biʹ-tee-as): (1) A nobleman and courtier of Dido (1.738); (2) A Trojan ally of
Aeneas, brother of Pandarus, both killed by Turnus (9.672).
BOLA (boʹ-la): A future town in Latium (6.775).
BOREAS (bo-reʹ-as): The god of the north wind. He is often imagined as coming out of
Thrace (10.350).
BRIAREUS (bri-arʹ-yoos): The name used by the gods for the hundred-handed giant who
warred against them during the titanomachy. Known as Aegaeon by mortals. Known in
Greek as Hecatonchires, literally “hundred-handed ones” (6.287).
BRONTES (bronʹ-teez): A Cyclops (8.424).
BRUTUS (brooʹ-tus): Here, Lucius Junius Brutus, the first consul of the Roman Republic. He
expelled the Tarquins, Rome’s former kings, and later killed his sons after they tried to lead
an insurrection on behalf of the Tarquins (6.818).

428

BUTES (booʹ-teez): (1) A boastful relative of Amycus who was once defeated in a boxing
match by Dares (5.371); (2) Anchises’ armor-bearer, whom Aeneas asks to protect his son,
Ascanius (9.646); (3) A Trojan, killed by Camilla (11.691).
BUTHROTUM (boo-throhʹ-tum): A city on the coast of Epirus built by Andromache and
Helenus (3.293).
BYRSA (beerʹ-sa): A walled citadel that stood above Carthage, on a hill of the same name.
According to legend, Dido purchased the hill the citadel stood on from the Libyans by
striking a deal to purchase as much land as could be covered by a single bull’s hide. Dido
cut the bull’s hide into strips, narrow enough so that they could ring the hill. The hill’s
name, up until that point Borsa, became the Greek Byrsa, meaning “ox-hide” (1.367).
CACUS (kaʹ-kus): The fire-breathing, monster son of Vulcan, who terrorized the country
around the Aventine Hill in Pallanteum until he was killed by Hercules. The anniversary of
his death marks the occasion for annual celebrations among the inhabitants of Pallanteum.
Name means “the Bad” in Greek (8.195).
CAECULUS (kayʹ-ku-lus): The son of Vulcan, founder of the city Praeneste, and an ally of
Turnus. Legend holds that his mother conceived him from a spark that flew up from the
hearth (7.678).
CAEDICUS (kayʹ-di-kus): (1) A Latin, a friend and guest of Remulus (9.360); (2) An
Etruscan ally of Mezentius (10.747).
CAENEUS (kayʹ-nyoos): The male name of a Thessalian nymph transfigured by Neptune into
a man, who was ultimately restored to being a woman (6.448); (2) An Etruscan soldier in
Mezentius’ unit who killed Ortygias and was killed by Turnus (9.573).
CAERE (kayʹ-re): An Etruscan city, known formerly as Agylla and now as Cervetri. Located
on the northwest coast of Rome, its banks were a place of worship to Silvanus, god of
forests, and the source of soldiers led by Lausus (7.652).
CAICUS (ka-eeʹ-kus): A Trojan ally of Aeneas whose ship is briefly missing in the storm off
the Libyan coast (1.183).
CAIETA (kay-eeʹ-ta): Port on the western coast of Italy about halfway between Rome and
Naples, named for Aeneas’ nurse. It is now known as Gaeta (6.900).
CALCHAS (kalʹ-kas): A Greek prophet important in the Trojan War (2.100).
CALES (kaʹ-leez): The site of a temple of Juno; this town, now called Calvi, sent troops to
serve Turnus (7.727).
CALLIOPE (kal-eyeʹ-o-pee): The muse of epic poetry and the leader of the nine muses.
Vergil invokes her for assistance in his craft, but only after invoking Erato in Book 7
(9.525).

429

CALYBE (kaʹ-li-be): An aged Rutulian priestess at Juno’s Rutulian temple. The fury Allecto
imitates her to rouse Turnus to engage in war (7.419).
CALYDON (kaʹ-li-don): An Aetolian city and the birthplace of the chieftain Diomedes
(7.306).
CAMERINA (ka-me-reeʹ-na): A city and marsh on the southern coast of Sicily. The
marshland was said to have been guarded by the Fates as protection against an attack on the
city (3.700).
CAMERS (kaʹ-mers): The son of the Latin commander Volcens, and a comrade of Turnus;
killed by Aeneas (10.562).
CAMILLA (ka-milʹ-la): A Volscian female commander and ally of Turnus (7.803).
CAMILLUS (ka-milʹ-lus): Marcus Furius Camillus; took back Rome from the Gauls in 390
BCE (6.825).
CAMPANIAN (kam-panʹ-yan): A citizen of Campania, a region in western central Italy
surrounding Naples. Its ancient capital was Capua, whose name, Vergil claims, was derived
from that of Aeneas’ ally Capys.
CAPENA (ka-penʹ-a): A town in Etruria, about twenty miles north of Rome; it sends troops
to Turnus’ aid (7.697).
CAPHEREUS (ka-ferʹ-yoos): A cape on the eastern coast of Euboea where the Greeks were
shipwrecked when heading home from Troy (11.261).
CAPITOL (kaʹ-pee-tol): A reference to the Capitoline Hill in Rome, on which stood the
temple of Jupiter Optimus Maximus, the center of the Roman state religion and the
destination of triumphal marches (6.837).
CAPREAE (kaʹ-pre-ay): An island off the coast of Italy, near Naples, that supplied troops to
Turnus. Modern-day Capri (7.736).
CAPYS (kaʹ-pis): (1) A Trojan ally of Aeneas and killer of Privernus. Aeneas and he are
reunited after the storm off the coast of Euboea. Also mentioned as the founder and
namesake of Capua (1.182); (2) A Trojan who urges against admitting the Trojan Horse
(2.35); (3) A king of Alba Longa of whom Anchises foretells to Aeneas when listing their
descendants (6.768).
CARIANS (kaʹ-ri-anz): A people from western Asia Minor, inhabitants of Caria, a region
down the coast from and allied with Troy.
CARINAE (ka-reenʹ-ay): An aristocratic district in future Rome, just north of the Forum
(8.361).
CARMENTAL (kar-menʹ-tal) GATE: One of the gates into ancient Rome, named after the
nymph Carmentis (8.338).

430

CARMENTIS (kar-menʹ-tis): A nymph, the mother of Evander by Mercury (8.336).
CARPATHIAN (kar-paʹ-thi-an): A citizen of Carpathus, an Aegean island between Crete and
Rhodes (5.594).
CARTHAGE (karʹ-thaj): A city in northern Libya on the coast of the Mediterranean. It
maintained a long-standing rivalry with Rome that developed into the three Punic Wars
fought between 264 and 146 BCE. Vergil traces the genealogy of this conflict to Aeneas’
betrayal of the city’s founder, Dido (1.14).
CASMILLA (kas-milʹ-la): The wife of Metabus and mother of Camilla (11.543).
CASPERIA (ka-sperʹ-i-a): A town in the Sabine region of Italy that supplies troops to Turnus
(7.714).
CASPIAN (kasʹ-pi-an): The area surrounding the Caspian Sea; includes the modern-day
countries of Russia, Kazakhstan, and Iran, among others (4.367).
CASSANDRA (kas-sanʹ-dra): The daughter of Priam and sister of Hector; although she
foretold events accurately, nothing she said would ever be believed because she rejected
Apollo, who gave her the gift of prophecy (2.246).
CASTOR (kasʹ-tor): A Trojan ally of Aeneas who held the first line of defense at the camp
when Aeneas was away (10.125).
CASTRUM INUÏ (kasʹ-trum iʹ-nuï): A town in the region of Latium; the word castrum means
“military camp” (6.775).
CATILINE (kaʹ-ti-line): Lucius Sergius Catilina. A Roman senator who tried to overthrow
the government in 63 BCE. His conspiracy was thwarted by Cicero, after which he fled
Rome and died in battle in 62 (8.668).
CATILLUS (ka-tilʹ-us): The brother of Tiburtus and twin brother of Coras. He and his
brothers founded Tibur, a town in central Italy that supplied troops to Turnus (7.672).
CATO (kaʹ-toh): (1) Marcus Porcius Cato (the Elder) (234 BCE–149 BCE), a statesman of
the Roman Republic, known for his strong moral conviction and for advocating the
destruction of Carthage (6.841); (2) Marcus Porcius Cato (the Younger) (95 BCE–46
BCE), great-grandson of Cato the Elder and opponent of Caesar. He committed suicide
rather than be defeated by Caesar (8.671).
CAUCASUS (kawʹ-ka-sus): A mountain range near the Caspian Sea, where Prometheus was
famously chained while an eagle eternally devoured his liver (4.366).
CAULON (kawʹ-lon): A city on the southwestern Italian coast (3.553).
CAYSTER (kayʹ-ster): A river in Lydia, the western region of Asia Minor, that flows into the
Aegean Sea. Now known as the Küçükmenderes River in modern-day Turkey (7.701).

431

CELAENO (se-layʹ-noh): The leader of the Harpies. She gives Aeneas prophecies of his
upcoming journeys when he encounters her at Strophades (3.211).
CELEMNA (se-lemʹ-na): A town in Campania that supplies troops to Turnus (7.739).
CENTAUR (senʹ-tawr): The name of the ship that Sergestus captains in the ship-race at
Anchises’ funeral games. It finishes in fourth place out of four (5.122).
CENTAURS (senʹ-tawrz): A race of wild beings that are half man and half horse, who resided
near Mount Pelion in central Greece. They are descendants of Ixion, who, in his lust for
Juno, is tricked by Jupiter into copulating with a cloud (6.286).
CERAUNIA (ke-rawʹ-ni-a): A region on the northwestern coast of Epirus, which itself lies on
the western coast of Greece near modern Albania. Greek for “thunder-headlands,” it was a
notoriously dangerous place for ships to sail, but also along the shortest route to Italy
(3.505).
CERBERUS (kerʹ-ber-us): The three-headed dog that guards the gates of the Underworld. As
his twelfth and final labor, Hercules brought Cerberus to the upper world and back down
again (6.417).
CERES (seeʹ-reez): Known to the Greeks as Demeter. Mother of Proserpina (Persephone).
The goddess of agriculture, the grain lands, and their products (and the etymological root of
the English word “cereal”) (1.713).
CETHEGUS (ke-theʹ-gus): A Rutulian soldier killed by Aeneas (12.514).
CHALCIS (khalʹ-kis): A city on the island of Euboea, which is itself off the eastern coast of
the Greek mainland. Cumae was a colony founded by citizens of this city (6.17).
CHAONIA (kay-ohʹ-nia): A region in Epirus where Jupiter’s oracle, Dodona, was located
(3.292).
CHAOS (kayʹ-os): According to Hesiod, the original state from which the Earth originated.
For Vergil, Chaos is personified as the father of Erebus, “darkness,” and Nox, “night”
(4.510).
CHARON (kaʹ-ron): Son of Erebus and Nox, he is the god in Hades who ferries dead souls
across the river Styx (6.298).
CHARYBDIS (kaʹ-rib-dis): A monstrous whirlpool on the Sicilian side of the Strait of
Messina between Italy and Sicily (3.420).
CHIMAERA (kye-mayʹ-ra): The name of the ship that Gyas captains at Anchises’ funeral
games. It finishes in third out of fourth place (5.118).
CHIMAERA: A fire-breathing monster that was part lion, part serpent, part goat; watches
over the entrance to the Underworld. There is an awe-inspiring representation of it on
Turnus’ helmet (6.288).

432

CHLOREUS (klohʹ-ryoos): A Trojan priest of Cybele. He was pursued by Camilla, until she
was killed by Arruns. Chloreus was killed by Turnus (11.768).
CHROMIS (krohʹ-mis): A Trojan killed by Camilla when she throws a spear at him from a
distance (11.676).
CIMINUS (kiʹ-mi-nus): A region in Etruria in northwestern Italy containing a lake
surrounded by hills. Now Lago di Ronciglione (7.696).
CIRCE (sirʹ-see): The goddess of the island Aeaea who turned Ulysses’ men into pigs
before he came and rescued them (3.387).
CISSEUS (kisʹ-syoos): (1) The king of Thrace, father of Hecuba, and father-in-law of Priam
(5.536); (2) A Latin warrior, the son of Hercules’ companion Melampus; killed by Aeneas
(10.318).
CITHAERON (ki-thayʹ-ron): A mountain in central Greece, where wild festivals for Bacchus
were held (4.303).
CLARUS (klaʹ-rus): A Lycian, brother of Sarpedon and ally of Aeneas (10.127).
CLAUDIAN (klawʹ-di-an): A member of the Roman gens (family) that descended from
Clausus (7.707).
CLAUSUS (klawʹ-sus): A Sabine commander who fights for Turnus (7.706).
CLOANTHUS (kloh-anʹ-thus): A Trojan ally of Aeneas, who despite being lost in the storm
off Carthage eventually reunites with his fellows and pilots the ship Scylla to victory at
Anchises’ funeral games (1.222).
CLOELIA (kleeʹ-li-a): A Roman girl praised in Livy for bravely escaping her captor
Porsenna by swimming all the way across the Tiber (8.651).
CLONIUS (kloʹ-ni-us): (1) A Trojan, killed by Turnus (9.575); (2) A different Trojan, killed
by Messapus (10.749).
CLONUS (kloʹ-nus): The son of Eurytus, the skilled metalworker who decorated the belt that
was stripped off Pallas’ dead body by Turnus (10.499).
CLUENTIUS (klu-enʹ-ti-us): A Roman family, progeny of Cloanthus (5.123).
CLUSIUM (klooʹ-si-um): One of the twelve main cities in Etruria, located on the banks of the
river Clanis (10.168).
CLYTIUS (kliʹ-ti-us): (1) A Trojan, son of Aeolus; killed by Turnus (9.774); (2) The father of
Menestheus and Acmon, two comrades of Aeneas (10.128); (3) A Rutulian comrade of
Turnus, and a warrior who loves Cydon, who is protected by his brothers from Aeneas
(10.325); (4) A Trojan, father of Euneus, who is killed by Camilla; perhaps identical with
Clytius (2) (11.666).

433

CNOSSUS (knosʹ-sus): The capital city of Crete, the location of both the god Minos and the
Labyrinth.
COCLES (kohʹ-kleez): Publius Horatius Cocles, a famous Roman who is most well known
for containing, along with two others, Lars Porsenna’s invasion of Rome (509 BCE) long
enough for his comrades to cut down the bridge and prevent enemy access of Rome
(8.650).
COCYTUS (koh-keeʹ-tus): One of the rivers of the Underworld; means “lamentation” in
Greek (6.132).
COEUS (keeʹ-us): The son of Mother Earth, one of the Titans, brother of Enceladus and
Rumor, father of Latona (4.179).
COLLATIA (kol-laʹ-ti-a): A Sabine town near Rome, built by the progeny of Silvius Aeneas,
the grandson or great-grandson of the Aeneid’s hero (6.774).
CORA (koʹ-ra): A town in Latium, in central Italy, built southeast of Rome in the Volscian
mountain range by the progeny of Silvius Aeneas, the grandson or great-grandson of the
Aeneid’s hero (6.776).
CORAS (koʹ-ras): Brother of Tiburtus and twin of Catillus. A founder of Tibur along with
his two brothers, he also fought for Turnus (7.672).
CORINTH (koʹ-rinth): A city in central Greece that gives its name to the strip of land on
which it is situated. Conquered and destroyed in 146 BCE by Lucius Mummius (6.836).
COROEBUS (ko-reeʹ-bus): The Phrygian fiancé of Priam’s daughter Cassandra; he is killed
while fighting alongside Aeneas during the sack of Troy (2.342).
CORYBANTS (ko-ri-banʹ-tez): The eunuch priests who honored the “Great Mother,” Cybele,
at Mount Cybelus; they were famous for their euphoric rituals and dances (3.112).
CORYNAEUS (ko-ri-nayʹ-us): (1) A Trojan priest, killed by Asilas, a Rutulian (6.227); (2)
Another Trojan, who kills the Rutulian Ebysus (12.298).
CORYTHUS (koʹ-ri-thus): (1) An ancient town in Etruria and the reputed birthplace of the
Trojan progenitor Dardanus (3.170); (2) The founder of that Etruscan town (9.11).
COSAE (koʹ-say): An Etruscan coastal city that sends troops to fight for Aeneas (10.168).
COSSUS (kosʹ-sus): Aulus Cornelius Cossus, a Roman general who is most well known for
being one of the three Roman generals to have ever won the “commander’s spoils” by
killing the enemy commander and stealing his armor; killed Tolumnius the Etruscan
general in 437 BCE (the only others to hold this honor were Romulus and Marcellus)
(6.841).
CRETAN (kreeʹ-tan): Of Crete (3.117).

434

CRETE (kreet): The largest Aegean island, south of the Peloponnese, and the kingdom of
Idomeneus (3.104).
CRETHEUS (kreʹ-thyoos): (1) A Trojan singer, soldier, and warrior-lord who defended
Aeneas’ camp against the Rutulians but was killed by Turnus (9.774); (2) A Greek soldier
fighting for Troy, who was killed by Turnus (12.537).
CREUSA (kre-ooʹ-sa): The daughter of Priam, first wife of Aeneas, mother of Ascanius.
Killed in the fall of Troy (2.562).
CRINISUS (kri-neeʹ-sus): A Sicilian river and the god that rules it. Sometimes referred to as
Crimisus (5.38).
CRUSTUMERIUM (kroos-too-merʹ-i-um): Ancient Sabine town near Rome that supplied
weapons for the Latin troops (7.631).
CUMAE (kooʹ-may): An Italian town located close to Naples. Founded by Greeks who
moved from the Euboean city of Chalcis. It was also the home of the Sibyl, Aeneas’ guide
to the Underworld, the entrance to which was close by (3.441).
CUNARUS (kuʹ-na-rus): The son of Cycnus, brother of Cupavo, a Ligurian ally of Aeneas
(10.185).
CUPAVO (ku-paʹ-vo): The son of Cycnus, brother of Cunarus; a Ligurian commander and
ally of Aeneas. Stood at the helm of the Centaur on her quests (10.186).
CUPENCUS (ku-penʹ-kus): A Rutulian priest killed by Aeneas during battle (12.539).
CUPID (kyooʹ-pid): The son of Venus; god of love, here always called Amor (1.659).
CURES (kooʹ-rez): The capital of the Sabine region near Rome. Ruled by king Tatius. Also
boasted the inhabitance of Numa Pompilius, the second king of Rome and its famous law
giver (6.810).
CURETES (koo-reʹ-teez): A group who resided on Crete and would later become priests of
Jupiter. They attained their status as priests by hiding the infant Jupiter from his raging
father, Saturn, who wanted to eat him (3.131).
CYBELE (ki-beeʹ-le): Known in Greek legend as Rhea, she was considered the Great Mother
(Magna Mater) of the gods (8.784).
CYCLADES (siʹ-cla-deez): A group of islands in the Aegean that circumscribe Delos (3.127).
CYCLOPES (syeʹ-klop-eez): One-eyed monsters who live on the island of Sicily and eat
human beings; Aeneas’ encounter with them acts as a sequel to Ulysses’ in the Odyssey,
when Ulysses tricks the Cyclops Polyphemus and blinds him. The Cyclopes also work in
Vulcan’s foundry, where they constructed Aeneas’ shield (3.569).
CYCNUS (keekʹ-nus): Legendary king of Liguria, father of Cupavo, lover of Phaëthon

435

(10.187).
CYDON (seeʹ-don): A Latin who fights for Turnus (10.324).
CYLLENE (keel-leʹ-ne): Mountain in Arcadia; Mercury’s birthplace, sacred to him (4.256).
CYMODOCEA (kee-mo-do-keʹ-a): A sea-nymph, daughter of Nereus, in Neptune’s entourage
who is known for her gifted ability of speech (10.225).
CYMOTHOE (kee-moʹ-tho-e): A sea-nymph who works with Triton to pull Trojan ships off
the rocks (1.144).
CYNTHUS (kinʹ-thus): A mountain on the island of Delos, where both Apollo and Diana
were born; a favorite stomping ground for both of them (1.498).
CYPRUS (syeʹ-prus): An island in the Mediterranean that Venus made her home and called
sacred. It is the same island as the modern Cyprus (1.622).
CYTHERA (ki-theʹ-ra): An island off the southeastern coast of the Peloponnese that is said to
be Aphrodite’s birthplace (1.681).
CYTHEREA (ki-theʹ-re-a): Another name for Aphrodite.
DAEDALUS (dayʹ-da-lus): The brilliant artifex who built the Labyrinth for Minos, the king of
Crete. When imprisoned on Crete with his son Icarus, he made his escape by constructing
wings made of feathers affixed to wooden beams with wax (6.14).
DAHAE (daʹ-hay): A nomadic Scythian people who roam east of the Caspian (8.728).
DANAÄNS (daʹ-na-ans): A name for the Greeks which comes from Danos, the ancient king
of Argos (2.398).
DANAË (daʹ-na-ee): The daughter and only child of Acrisius, king of Argos; the mother, by
Jupiter, of Perseus. Servius says that her father imprisoned her because of a prophecy that
said he would die by the hand of his daughter’s son. While she was imprisoned, Jupiter
visited her and they had a child, Perseus. Her father put her and the baby into a wooden
chest and tossed it into the sea. They washed ashore on the coast of Italy at Ardea, the city
she founded (7.409).
DARDANIAN (dar-dayʹ-ni-an): Of the kingdom of Dardanus (4.366).
DARDANUS (darʹ-da-nus): The son of Zeus and Electra, Atlas’ daughter. Ancestor of Priam
and the kings of Troy, as well as of Aeneas. Because of him the Trojans are sometimes
called Dardanians or Dardans (3.94).
DARES (daʹ-rez): A Trojan boxer who was bested by Entellus at Anchises’ funeral games;
killed by Turnus (5.368).
DAUCUS (dawʹ-kus): The father of the twins Thymber and Larides, who were both killed by
Pallas (3) (10.390).

436

DAUNUS (dawʹ-nus): According to legend, the king of Daunia, an Apulian region; father of
Turnus (10.616).
DECII (deʹ-ki-ee): Roman family of which two members, father and son, share the name
Publius Decius Mus. The two were heroes of the Roman republic, the father sacrificing
himself at the time of the Latin War in 340 BCE at the battle of Veseris, and the son at the
battle of Sentinum in 295 BCE, fighting against the Samnites (6.824).
DEIOPEA (de-i-o-peʹ-a): A sea-nymph of Juno’s whom she offers as a bribe to Aeolus to
wipe out Aeneas’ fleet with a storm as they sail near the Libyan coast (1.72).
DEIPHOBE (de-iʹ-fo-bee): The Cumaean Sibyl, daughter of Glaucus, who directs Aeneas
through the Underworld (6.35).
DEIPHOBUS (de-iʹ-fo-bus): A son of Priam, leader of the Trojans after the death of Hector.
Married Helen after Hector’s death. Killed by Menelaus during the fall of Troy; Aeneas
encounters his spirit in the Underworld (2.310).
DELOS (deʹ-los): An island in the Aegean that drifted until Latona gave birth there to Diana
and Apollo (3.124).
DEMODOCUS (de-moʹ-do-kus): An ally of Aeneas, killed by Halaesus (10.413).
DEMOLEOS (de-moʹ-le-os): A Greek whose armor Aeneas strips from his dead body and
offers as a prize for second place in the ship-race at Anchises’ funeral games (5.260).
DEMOPHOÖN (de-moʹ-fo-on): A Trojan killed by Camilla from close proximity (11.675).
DERCENNUS (der-keʹ-nus): An ancient king of Laurentum, whose tomb Opis, Diana’s
messenger, uses as a lookout point (11.851).
DIANA (dye-anʹ-a): Also known as Artemis, daughter of Latona and Jupiter, twin sister of
Apollo, virgin goddess of hunting and the moon (1.498).
DICTE (dikʹ-te): A mountain in eastern Crete. Jupiter’s birthplace; as a baby, he was hidden
from his father, Saturn, in its caves.
DIDO (dyeʹ-doh): An exile of Phoenicia, founder of Carthage, initially the wife of Sychaeus,
then, after his death, the lover of Aeneas. She ultimately commits suicide upon his
departure from Carthage (1.299).
DIDYMAÖN (di-di-mayʹ-on): A metalsmith (5.359).
DINDYMA (dinʹ-di-ma): A holy Phrygian mountain, home of the Great Mother, Cybele; a
place of worship for her followers (9.618).
DIOMEDES (deye-o-meeʹ-deez): A Greek, son of Tydeus, king of Argos, founder of the
Apulian city Argyripa (1.96).
DIONE (di-ohʹ-ne): A goddess, mother of Venus.

437

DIORES (di-ohʹ-reez): A Trojan, brother of Amycus; places third in the running race at the
funeral games of Anchises; killed by Turnus (5.297).
DIOXIPPUS (di-oks-ipʹ-us): A Trojan, killed by Turnus (9.574).
DIS: The god of the Underworld and husband of Persephone (4.703).
DODONA (doh-dohʹ-na): The location of an oracle of Zeus in Epirus (3.465).
DOG STAR: Orion’s Dog, whose appearance is interpreted as a “fatal sign” since it portends
plague and kills crops (3.141).
DOLICHAON (doh-li-kayʹ-on): A Trojan, father of Hebrus, killed by Mezentius (10.696).
DOLON (doʹ-lon): A Trojan scout, son of Eumedes; killed by Diomedes while trying to spy
on the Greek camp (12.347).
DOLOPIAN (do-loʹ-pi-an): Of Phthia, the home of Achilles, and a region of southern
Thessaly (2.7).
DONUSA (do-nooʹ-sa): One of the central Cyclades islands; on the southeastern side of
Delos, in the Aegean (3.125).
DORIC (doʹ-rik) : Of the Dorians, a Greek people after whom a dialect of ancient Greek was
named (2.28).
DORYCLUS (do-reeʹ-klus): A Rutulian, husband of Beroë (5.620).
DOTO (doʹ-toh): A sea-nymph, daughter of Nereus (9.102).
DRANCES (dranʹ-seez): A Rutulian who openly criticizes Turnus (11.122).
DREPANUM (dreʹ-pa-num): The town on the northwest coast of Sicily where Anchises died.
Now called Trapani (3.707).
DRUSI (drooʹ-zee): A patrician family of Rome from which many great generals were born
(6.824).
DRYOPE (driʹ-o-pe): A wood-nymph, mother by Faunus of Tarquitus, a Rutulian who is
killed by Aeneas (10.551).
DRYOPIANS (dri-ohʹ-pi-anz): A people who have long been said to reside in northern Greece
on the flanks of Mount Parnassus (4.147).
DRYOPS (driʹ-ops): A Trojan from Cures, killed by Clausus (10.346).
DULICHIUM (doo-liʹ-ki-um): An island in the Ionian Sea, near Ithaca (3.271).
DYMAS (diʹ-mas): A Trojan, Aeneas’ aide. Killed unintentionally by other Trojans in the
midst of Troy’s destruction (2.340).
EARTH: The earth personified as a goddess (4.166).

438

EBYSUS (eʹ-bi-sus): A Rutulian killed by Corynaeus (12.299).
EDONIAN (e-dohʹ-nee-an): A member of the Edoni, a Thracian tribe who lived on the
Strymon.
EGERIA (e-geʹ-ri-a): Latin water-nymph, whose healing grove shielded Hippolytus (7.763).
EGYPT: The country in north Africa, a synonym for Cleopatra, the Egyptian queen.
Sometimes reckoned by the ancients as belonging to Asia (8.687).
ELEAN (e-leeʹ-an): From Elis, a region in the northwest Peloponnese, home of the Epeans.
Its chief city, Olympia, held the Olympic games.
ELECTRA (e-lekʹ-tra): One of the daughters of Atlas; the sister of Maia, mother by Jupiter of
Dardanus, founder of Troy (8.135).
ELISSA (e-lisʹ-sa): Another name for Dido.
ELYSIUM (e-liʹ-zi-um): A region in the Underworld reserved for the righteous. The location
where Aeneas reunites with his father’s spirit (5.734).
EMATHION (e-maʹ-thi-on): A Trojan killed by Liger (9.571).
ENCELADUS (en-kelʹ-a-dus): The Giant child of Gaia. One of those who rebelled against
Jupiter’s rule and was struck down by him with a lightning bolt and buried underneath
Mount Etna as eternal punishment (3.578).
ENTELLUS (en-telʹ-lus): A Sicilian boxing champion who bests Dares during Anchises’
funeral games (5.387).
EOAS (eʹ-os): Dawn, goddess of the morning, daughter of Hyperion, wife of Tithonus, and
mother by Tithonus of Memnon.
EPEUS (e-peʹ-us): A Greek, builder of the Trojan Horse, and one of the troops concealed in
it (2.265).
EPIRUS (e-pyeʹ-rus): A mountainous region of northwestern Greece by the Adriatic coast
(3.292).
EPULO (eʹ-pu-lo): A Rutulian killed by Achates (12.460).
EPYTIDES (e-pi-tyeʹ-deez): A Trojan; guardian and companion of Ascanius (5.546).
EPYTUS (eʹ-pi-tus): A Trojan who fights alongside Aeneas at the fall of Troy (2.339).
ERATO (eʹ-ra-toh): A muse associated with love poetry. It has been suggested that her name
was invoked in Book 7 because the second half of the Aeneid deals with a war kindled by
Lavinia’s suitors (7.37).
EREBUS (eʹ-re-bus): A child of Chaos. Father, by his sister Night, of Day. God of primeval
darkness; also a name for the lower world (4.510).

439

ERETUM (e-reʹ-tum): An ancient Sabine city on the east bank of the Tiber, north of Rome.
Its troops are under the command of Clausus (7.711).
ERICHAETES (e-ri-kayʹ-teez): A Trojan son of Lycaon, killed by Messapus (10.750).
ERIDANUS (e-riʹ-da-nus): A legendary river thought to flow from the Elysian fields to the
living world. Commonly identified as the Po (6.658).
ERIPHYLE (e-ri-feeʹ-lee): The wife of the prophet Amphiaraus, king of Argos. In the war of
the Seven Against Thebes, she accepted a bribe to plot to betray her husband, resulting in
his death. She was killed by her son Alcmaeon (6.445).
ERULUS (eʹ-ru-lus): The king of Praeneste, son of Feronia, who gave him three lives, which
forced Evander to slay him three times (8.563).
ERYMANTHUS (e-ri-manʹ-thus): A mountain range in Arcadia in southern Greece, and the
home of a legendary boar that Hercules killed while he was performing his Twelve Labors
(5.449).
ERYMAS (eʹ-ri-mas): A Trojan ally of Aeneas, killed by Turnus (9.702).
ERYX (eʹ-riks): (1) A mountain and city on the northwestern coast of Sicily, with a temple
of Venus (1.570); (2) The king of Sicily, son of Venus and Butes, half brother of Aeneas.
Although a prizewinning boxer, he was killed by Hercules in a famous match (5.392).
ETHIOPIA: A country south of Egypt in northeastern Africa, and one of Neptune’s favorite
stomping grounds (4.480).
ETNA (etʹ-na): A volcano in eastern Sicily; home of the Cyclopes (3.554).
ETRURIA (e-trooʹ-ri-a): An Italian region north of Rome, now Tuscany; home of the
Etruscans (8.65).
ETRUSCAN (e-trusʹ-kan): Of the people of Tuscany who originally came from Lydia in Asia
Minor; synonymous with Tuscan (7.43).
EUBOEAN (yoo-beeʹ-an): Of Euboea, a large Aegean island lying just east of Greece; see
Cumae.
EUMEDES (yoo-meʹ-deez): A Trojan, son of Dolon (12.346).
EUMELUS (yoo-meʹ-lus): A Trojan companion who notifies the Trojans that their ships are
ablaze (5.664).
EUNAEUS (yoo-nayʹ-us): A Trojan, son of Clytius, killed by Camilla (11.666).
EUPHRATES (yoo-frayʹ-teez): Along with the Tigris, one of the two rivers of the Fertile
Crescent in Asia Minor, later fixed as the easternmost boundary of the Roman Empire
(8.726).

440

EUROTAS (yoo-rohʹ-tas): A river running through Lacedaemon on which Sparta stood
(1.498).
EURUS (yooʹ-rus): The southeast wind (1.84).
EURYALUS (yoo-reeʹ-a-lus): A Trojan, close friend of Nisus, ally of Aeneas, winner of the
footrace at the funeral games of Anchises; killed by the Volscians (5.294).
EURYPYLUS (yoo-riʹ-pi-lus): A Greek delegate to Apollo’s oracle (2.114).
EURYSTHEUS (yoo-risʹ-thyoos): A king of Mycenae, grandson of Perseus. He ordered
Hercules to perform his Twelve Labors (8.292).
EURYTION (yoo-riʹ-ti-on): A Trojan, son or brother of the archer Pandarus, from Lycia. He
comes runner-up in the archery contest because while he shot the target dove, the arrow of
the victor, Acestes, burst into a flaming omen (5.495).
EURYTUS (yooʹ-ri-tus): The father of the goldsmith Clonus.
EVADNE (e-vadʹ-nee): The wife of Capaneus, one of the Seven Against Thebes. When her
husband was killed, she threw herself on his funeral pyre and burned to death (6.447).
EVANDER (e-vanʹ-der): The mythical king of Arcadia, son of Mercury by the nymph
Carmentis. Immigrated with his people to found the city of Pallanteum on the banks of the
Tiber. He hosts Aeneas and his Trojans; his son, Pallas, becomes Aeneas’ ally (8.52).
EVANTHES (e-vanʹ-theez): A soldier in Aeneas’ army (10.702).
FABARIS (faʹ-ba-ris): A river of the Sabine region, branch of the Tiber. Now called Farfa
(7.715).
FABII (faʹbi-ee): A prominent family that included several Roman leaders throughout its
lineage. Its most well-known member was Quintus Fabius Maximus (died in 203 BCE),
known as the Delayer because he wore down Hannibal by slowly killing his troops instead
of directly engaging with them in battle, where he would have lost (6.845).
FABRICIUS (fa-briʹ-ki-us): Caius Fabricius Luscinus, Roman consul (282 BCE) and general;
conqueror of Pyrrhus the Macedonian. Regarded by many as the epitome of the ancient
Roman virtues (6.843).
FADUS (faʹ-dus): A Rutulian who besieged Aeneas’ troops in his absence, killed by
Euryalus (9.344).
FATES: Often personified as three goddesses, they are also known as the Parcae; visualized
as spinning thread that shaped the destinies of mortals, their names were Clotho, the
“spinner,” who spun the thread, Lachesis, the “allotter,” who measured the length of the
thread, and Atropos, the “eternal,” who cut the thread (1.22).
FAUNS (fawnz): Mythical beings, half human, half horse, from the fields of the Roman

441

countryside (8.314).
FAUNUS (fawʹ-nus): A Roman deity or deified king, often identified with Pan. In the Aeneid
he is represented as the son of Picus by the Latin nymph Marica, grandson of Saturn, father
of Latinus and of Tarquitus (7.47).
FERONIA (fe-rohʹ-ni-a): The mother of Erulus; ancient Italian nature divinity, worshipped in
groves. She was a goddess of fertility to whom flowers and fruits were offered, as well as
the goddess of emancipation; newly freed slaves would don the cap of liberty at her holy
site (7.800).
FESCENNIA (fe-skenʹ-ni-a): A town in southern Etruria; its troops fought for Turnus (7.695).
FIDENA (fi-deʹ-na): A town in Latium, north of Rome, founded by Alban kings (6.773).
FIELD OF MARS: Known in Latin as the Campus Martius. Originally founded as an open
space of ground at Rome lying north of its center and outside of the walls. Bounded on the
east by the Quirinal, Capitoline, and Pincian hills and on the west by the Tiber (6.872).
FLAVINIA (fla-vinʹ-ya): A southern Etruscan city (7.696).
FORTUNE: The personification of luck, who had famous places of worship in Rome, and
even more so in Praeneste.
FORULI (foʹ-ru-lee): A town in the Sabine region, south of Amiternum, whose troops were
allies of Turnus. Now called Civita Tomassa (7.714).
FUCINUS (foo-keeʹ-nus): A Latin lake in the Apennines east of Rome, near which stood the
grove of Angitia and city of Marruvium, the capital of the Marsi. Also inhabited by Umbro
(7.759).
FURIES: The Erinyes, Eumenides, or avenging goddesses. Their names are Megaera,
Allecto, and Tisiphone. They are particularly concerned with crimes between family
members (3.252).
GABIÏ (gaʹ-bi-ee): An ancient Latin town, due east of Rome, a site of Jupiter’s worship
(6.773).
GAETULIAN (gay-toolʹ-yan): Of a warlike tribe from north Africa that resided in Morocco
(4.40).
GALAESUS (ga-layʹ-sus): An old Latin, killed at the outbreak of the war between the Italians
and the Trojans while trying to broker peace (7.535).
GALATEA (ga-la-teʹ-a): A sea-nymph daughter of Nereus (9.103).
GANGES (ganʹ-jeez): A river of India, which flows from the Himalayas into the Bay of
Bengal (9.30).
GANYMEDE (gaʹ-ni-meed): One of the three sons of Tros, the first king of Troy. He was

442

carried away by Jupiter’s eagle for his beauty to Olympus to become the cupbearer of the
gods, replacing Hebe, Juno’s daughter (1.28).
GARAMANTS (gaʹ-ra-mantz): A tribe from inner Africa, located in the eastern Sahara and
southeast of the Gaetulians. Conquered by Rome in 19 BCE (6.794).
GARGANUS (gar-gaʹ-nus): A rugged Apulian peninsula (11.247).
GATES OF SLEEP: The Gate of Ivory and the Gate of Horn. Aeneas exits the Underworld
through the Gate of Ivory, which is said to send false shades to the world above (6.893).
GATES OF WAR: Meant to recall the temple of the god Janus at Rome. He was the god of
doors and gates, and protector of the state during wartime. The temple was closed twice
throughout the history of the Republic but thrice during the reign of Augustus, all in times
of peace (1.294).
GAULS (gawlz): Celtic tribes in France and northern Italy; also used to refer to people from
northern Europe. Around 390 BCE they laid siege to and captured Rome. Though they
were soon expelled, the following centuries saw them a constant menace to Rome (6.858).
GELA (geʹ-la): A coastal city of southern Sicily, situated on a river going by the same name
(3.702).
GELONIAN (ge-lohʹ-ni-an): Of a Scythian tribe hailing from Russia, who were well known
for their skill at archery.
GERYON (geʹ-ri-on): A giant with three bodies, killed three times by Hercules, who drove
his oxen from Spain to the Tiber as the tenth of his labors (6.290).
GETAE (geʹ-tay): A Thracian tribe that lived along the Danube (7.604).
GLAUCUS (glawʹ-kus): (1) A sea god, Deiphone’s father, who accompanies Neptune
(5.823); (2) A Trojan warrior, one of the three sons of Antenor. Aeneas sees his shade
among the war heroes in the Underworld (6.483); (3) A Trojan, son of Imbrasus, killed by
Turnus (12.343).
GNOSIAN (gnohʹ-zi-an): Cretan.
GORGON (gorʹ-gon): A general term to refer to Medusa and her two sisters, Stheno and
Euryale, who all had snakes for hair. Any mortal who looked directly at a Gorgon would
turn to stone. Medusa had her head cut off by Perseus and it was given to Minerva, who
fixed it to her shield, the aegis (2.616).
GORTYNIAN (gor-teeʹ-ni-an): Of Gortyna, a city in Crete, famous for its archers.
GRACCHI (graʹ-kee): A prominent Roman family whose most famous members, Tiberius
(died in 133 BCE) and Gaius Sempronius (died 121 BCE), died for their efforts to enact
reform in the Roman constitution (6.842).

443

GRAVISCAE (gra-visʹ-kye): An Etrurian port city, north of Rome. The name is related to
gravis, “weighed down,” because of the region’s unhealthy climate (10.184).
GREAT MOTHER: Another term for Cybele (2.788).
GREATEST ALTAR : The Ara Maxima, an altar dedicated to the rites of Hercules Invictus. It
was located in the Forum Boarium by the Tiber, and what remains of it lies beneath the
modern Church of Santa Maria in Cosmedin (8.272).
GRYNEAN (gree-neʹ-an): Of Grynia, a town in Aeolia in Asia Minor that had a temple and
an oracle of Apollo.
GYAROS (geeʹ-a-ros): A small Aegean island, one of the anchors to which Apollo fastened
his birthplace, the island of Delos, to stop it from drifting (3.76).
GYAS (geeʹ-as): (1) A Trojan ally of Aeneas, shipwrecked off the coast of Sicily, but later
able to captain the Chimaera to third place in the ship-race at Anchises’ funeral games
(1.222); (2) A Latin, son of Melampus, ally of Turnus against Aeneas (10.318).
GYGES (gyeʹ-jeez): A Trojan ally of Aeneas, who defended his camp in his absence, killed
by Turnus (9.762).
GYLIPPUS (gi-lipʹ-pus): The Arcadian father whose nine sons ward off an attack by
Tolumnius the Latin (12.272).
HAEMON (hayʹ-mon): (1) A Rutulian priest of Mars who participates in the attack on the
Trojans’ camp during the absence of Aeneas (9.686); (2) A Latin whose son, a priest of
Diana and Apollo, was a soldier of Turnus and killed by Aeneas (10.537).
HALAESUS (ha-layʹ-sus): An ally of Turnus, chief of the Aurunci. Once a companion of
Agamemnon, his origin is Greek. Killed while defending Imaon (7.723).
HALIUS (haʹ-li-us): Trojan ally of Aeneas, killed by Turnus while he defended the camp
against Rutulian attack (9.766).
HALYS (haʹ-lis): Trojan ally of Aeneas, killed by Turnus while he defended the camp
against Rutulian attack (9.765).
HAMMON (hamʹ-mon): The god of the Libyans, who was Zeus to the Greeks and Jupiter to
the Romans. Iärbas boasted of his descent from Hammon and introduced him as a deity to
his countrymen (4.198).
HARPALYCE (har-paʹ-li-ke): A legendary Thracian huntress and rider, a princess and warrior
(1.316).
HARPALYCUS (har-paʹ-li-kus): A Trojan ally of Aeneas, killed by Camilla (11.675).
HARPIES (harʹ-peez): Greek for “snatchers.” Winged monsters with birds’ bodies and
women’s faces (3.212).

444

HEBRUS (heʹ-brus): (1) A Thracian river that flows into the Macedonian Sea (1.318); (2) A
Trojan, son of Dolichaön, ally of Aeneas, killed by Mezentius (10.696).
HECATE (heʹ-ka-tee): One of the three aspects of Diana, who makes up a triform deity.
Diana on Earth, Hecate (also known as Trivia) in Hell, and Luna, the moon, in Heaven.
Goddess of the Underworld and of witchcraft (4.511); see Diana.
HECTOR (hekʹ-tor): A Trojan, prince of Troy, commander of the Trojan army, son of Priam
and Hecuba, husband of Andromache, father of Astyanax; killed by Achilles and dragged
around the walls of Troy (1.98).
HECUBA (heʹ-kyoo-ba): Priam’s queen and mother of Hector (2.501).
HELEN (heʹ-len): The daughter of Leda and Jupiter (who visited Leda disguised as a swan),
wife of Menelaus, lover of Paris. The most beautiful woman in the world. When she
married Menelaus, he made her suitors pledge that they would come to his aid if anyone
kidnapped her. This pledge drives the Trojan War after Helen flees with Paris (1.649).
HELENOR (he-leʹ-nor): A Trojan, son of a Maeonian king and a slave, Licymnia; killed by
the Rutulians when defending the Trojan camp in Aeneas’ absence (9.544).
HELENUS (heʹ-le-nus): A Trojan, son of Priam. A prophet who was taken after the fall of
Troy by Pyrrhus, son of Achilles, to his home in Epirus. After Pyrrhus’ murder, he married
Hector’s widow, Andromache (3.294).
HELICON (heʹ-li-kon): A mountain in Boeotia, home of the Muses. Sacred to Apollo
(7.641).
HELORUS (he-lohʹ-rus): A town and its river in southeastern Sicily with wide marshes and
fertile land near its mouth (3.698).
HELYMUS (heʹ-li-mus): A Sicilian of Acestes’ court, who places second in the running race
at the funeral games of Anchises (5.73).
HERBESUS (her-beʹ-sus): A Rutulian who besieged Aeneas’ troops in his absence; killed by
Euryalus (9.344).
HERCULES (herʹ-kyoo-leez): The son of Jupiter and Almena, celebrated for his strength and
completion of his Twelve Labors, twelve tasks imposed on him by Hera. Sometimes called
by his patronymic, Alcides (10.321).
HERMINIUS (her-miʹ-ni-us): A Trojan, killed by Catillus (11.641).
HERMIONE (her-myeʹ-o-nee): A Spartan, daughter of Menelaus and Helen and
granddaughter of Leda; deserted her husband, Pyrrhus, to marry Orestes (3.328).
HERMUS (herʹ-mus): A river of Lydia in Asia Minor (7.721).
HERNICAN (herʹ-ni-kan): Of a warlike tribe of Latium whose home was a rocky territory in

445

Latium, southeast of Rome. They sent troops to fight for Turnus (7.684).
HESIONE (he-syeʹ-o-nee): The daughter of Laomedon, wife of Telamon, sister of Priam,
mother of Ajax and Teucer. When Laomedon initially withheld payment from Neptune and
Jupiter for building the walls of Troy, the two gods sent a giant sea-monster to kill him.
Hercules saved him, and Hesione and her husband went on to rule over Salamis (8.159).
HESPERIA (he-sperʹ-i-a): “Land of the Evening” or “Land of the West,” another name for
Italy (1.530).
HESPERIDES (hes-perʹ-ee-deez): Westerners or Italians in general, or the nymph daughters of
Hesperus, the Evening Star, in particular, who are known to have dominion over a garden
filled with golden apples (4.484).
HICETAON (hi-ke-tayʹ-on): A Trojan, father of Thyoetes, who is killed by Turnus (10.124).
HIMELLA (hi-melʹ-la): A river that empties into the Tiber. The Sabine area surrounding it
supplied troops to Turnus (7.714).
HIPPOCOÖN (hip-poʹ-ko-on): A Trojan ally of Aeneas. Places last in the archery contest at
the funeral games of Anchises (5.492).
HIPPOLYTE (hip-poʹ-li-te): A renowned Thracian Amazon queen, wife of Theseus (11.660).
HIPPOLYTUS (hip-poʹ-li-tus): Son of Theseus and Hippolyte, father of Virbius, and faithful
worshipper of Diana. When he rejected his step-mother’s seduction, she accused him to his
father. His father, Theseus, begged Neptune to kill his son and he did, by maddening the
horses of Hippolytus so that they dragged him to his death. Vergil presents Asclepius, son
of Apollo, as resurrecting him from the dead, so that he lives out the rest of his days under
the name Virbius (like his son), protected by Diana (7.761).
HIPPOTAS (hipʹ-po-tas): A Trojan, father of Amastrus, who is killed by Camilla (11.674).
HISBO (hizʹ-boh): A Rutulian in Turnus’ army killed by Pallas (10.384).
HOMOLE (hoʹ-mo-le): A mountain in Thessaly inhabited by Centaurs (7.675).
HYADES (hyeʹ-a-deez): A constellation which rises in the rainy season (1.744).
HYDASPES (hi-dasʹ-peez): A Trojan killed by Sacrator (10.748).
HYDRA (hyeʹ-dra): (1) A fifty-headed beast who guarded the entrance to the Underworld
(6.576); (2) A seven-headed Lernean Hydra killed by Hercules as the second of his Twelve
Labors; because the beast grew back its heads as quickly as they were cut off, Hercules had
to cauterize the decapitations in order to defeat his foe (8.300).
HYLAEUS (heel-layʹ-us): A Centaur killed by Hercules (8.294).
HYLLUS (heelʹ-lus): A Trojan killed by Turnus (12.535).

446

HYPANIS (heeʹ-pa-nis): A Trojan who fights beside Aeneas at the fall of Troy (2.341).
HYRCANIAN (heer-kayʹ-ni-an): Of Hyrcania, a region on the southern shores of the Caspian
Sea (7.604).
HYRTACUS (heerʹ-ta-kus): (1) A Trojan, the father of Hippocoön, who places last in the
archery contest at the funeral games of Anchises (5.492); (2) A Trojan, the father of Nisus
(9.177).
IAERA (i-ayʹ-ra): A wood-nymph of Phrygian Mount Ida; mother by Alcanor of Pandarus
and Bitias, to whom she gave birth in Jupiter’s grove (9.673).
IÄPYX (i-ahʹ-piks): (1) An Apulian who resides in the fields surrounding Mount Garganus
(11.247); (2) A Trojan, descendant of Iäsus; treats Aeneas’ wound (12.391).
IÄRBAS (i-arʹ-bas): An African warlord whose advances are rejected by Dido; son of Jupiter
Hammon (4.36).
IÄSIUS (i-aʹ-si-us): A Trojan, son of Jupiter and Electra, brother of Dardanus, son-in-law of
Teucer, Aeneas’ forebear who had settled in Italy (3.168).
IÄSUS (iʹ-asus): Father of Palinurus, Aeneas’ helmsman, and of Iäpyx (5.843).
ICARUS (iʹ-ka-rus): The son of Daedalus, imprisoned with him in the Cretan labyrinth. His
father constructed wings for their escape and warned Icarus not to fly too close to the sun
because its heat would melt the wax holding the feathers in place. Icarus disregarded the
warning and soared too high; he fell into the Aegean Sea and drowned (6.31).
IDA (eyeʹ-da): (1) A Phrygian mountain range south of Troy, frequented by Jupiter (2.697);
(2) A huntress and nymph, possibly the mother of Nisus (9.178); (3) A mountain on Crete
where Venus finds her herbaceous plants (12.412).
IDAEUS (eye-dayʹ-us): (1) Priam’s charioteer, who stays with his chariot even when Idaeus
is in the Underworld (6.485); (2) A Trojan who defended Aeneas’ camp in his absence
(9.501).
IDALIA (eye-daʹ-li-a): A town, mountain, and forest on Cyprus; sacred to Venus, whose
rites are performed there (5.760).
IDAS (eyeʹdas): (1) A Trojan, killed by Turnus (9.576); (2) The father of three sons who
were warriors and comrades of Aeneas, all killed by Clausus (10.352).
IDMON (idʹ-mon): A Rutulian and messenger of Turnus (12.75).
IDOMENEUS (eye-dohʹ-men-yoos): The son of Deucalion, king of Crete, one of the Cretan
commanders against Troy. He was banished from Crete for killing his son by using him as
an offering to the gods (3.121).
ILIA (iʹ-li-a): A priestess of Vesta and daughter of King Numitor; also known as Rhea

447

Silvia. She was the mother of Romulus and Remus by the god Mars (1.273).
ILIAN (iʹ-li-an): Of Ilium/Troy.
ILIONE (i-liʹ-o-ne): A princess of Troy, the first of Priam’s daughters born to Hecuba
(1.654).
ILIONEUS (i-liʹ-o-nyoos): A Trojan comrade of Aeneas. Killed Lucetius, served as a
representative of Aeneas when Aeneas himself could not be present, such as before Latinus
and Dido (1.120).
ILIUM (iʹ-li-um) Troy (1.268).
ILLYRIA (il-leeʹ-ri-a): A region in northwestern Greece, on the coast of the Adriatic Sea.
Navigating its shores was notoriously difficult for sailors.
ILUS (iʹ-lus): (1) The original name of Aeneas’ son prior to the fall of Troy. Afterward, he
has two names, Ascanius and Iülus (1.268); (2) The first son of Tros, father of Laomedon,
grandfather of Priam, and founder of Troy, from whom it gets the name Ilium (6.649); (3)
A Rutulian soldier of Turnus in Pallas’ line of fire (10.400).
ILVA (ilʹ-va): An island off the Etrurian coast; modern Elba (10.173).
IMAON (i-mayʹ-on): A Rutulian soldier of Turnus, protected by Halaesus (10.424).
IMBRASUS (imʹ-bra-sus): (1) The father of Asius, a soldier of Aeneas (10.123); (2) A
Lycian, father of Glaucus and Lades, both killed by Turnus (12.344).
INACHUS (iʹ-na-kus): The founding king of Argos, father of Io, and son of Oceanus. Vergil
treats him as the god of the Argolid’s chief river, and he is represented on the shield of
Turnus as such (7.287).
INARIME (ee-narʹ-i-me): A volcanic island in the Tyrrhenian, between the promontory of
Misenum and Prochyta, or present-day Ischia. Jupiter buried Typhoeus here, if not under
Etna (9.715).
INO (eyeʹ-noh): Cadmus’ daughter, previously a mortal, now a sea-nymph in Neptune’s
court (5.823).
IO (eyeʹ-oh): The daughter of Inachus, the river god, and princess of Argos, a monster with
a hundred eyes. Beloved by Jupiter and turned into a heifer by Juno, though Io eventually
regained her human form (7.790).
IÖLLAS (i-olʹ-las): A Trojan killed by Catillus (11.640).
IONIAN (eye-ohnʹ-i-an): Of Ionia, the maritime region of Asia Minor, below the Adriatic
Sea and between southern Italy and Greece (3.211).
IÖPAS (i-ohʹ-pas): A bard of Carthage, at the court of Dido; he was taught by Atlas (1.740).

448

IPHITUS (iʹ-fi-tus): A Trojan who fought beside Aeneas at the fall of Troy (2.435).
IRIS (eyeʹ-ris): A goddess who typically comes to earth in a rainbow as a messenger of the
gods (4.694).
ISMARA (izʹ-ma-ra): A mountain in Thrace, and city of the same name (10.351).
ISMARUS (izʹ-ma-rus): A Lydian warrior who fights at the side of Iülus, one of the defenders
of Aeneas’ camp (10.139).
ITALUS (iʹ-ta-lus): One of the founders of Italy (7.179).
ITYS (iʹ-tis): A Trojan killed by Turnus (9.574).
IÜLUS (i-uʹ-lus): An alternative name for Ascanius (1.267).
IXION (eek-seeʹ-on): The king of the Lapiths, father of Pirithoüs. He attempted to rape Juno
and was punished by being stretched and bound to a wheel that revolved in the Underworld
eternally (6.602).
JANICULUM (ja-niʹ-cu-lum): A hill on the western side of the Tiber across from Rome,
where Janus built a fortress, according to Evander (8.358).
JANUS (jaʹ-nus): A two-headed Italian god who presided over gateways, entrances, and
beginnings, as of the day and the year. He was represented as facing both forward and
backward, looking toward the past and future equally (7.181).
JOVE (johv): An alternative name for Jupiter (1.27).
JULIUS (joolʹ-yus): The family name passed down from Iülus; both Julius Caesar and
Octavian, later Augustus, had this as their family name (1.288).
JUNO (jooʹ-noh): The queen of the gods, goddess of marriage, daughter of Saturn, sister and
wife of Jupiter, patron deity of Carthage. She was hostile to Aeneas because of his Trojan
origins. Known to the Greeks as Hera (1.4).
JUPITER (jooʹ-pi-ter): The king of the gods, alternatively called Jove, the son of Saturn,
whom he dethroned, brother and husband of Juno, father of the Olympians as well as many
mortals. Known to the Greeks as Zeus (1.79).
JUTURNA (yoo-turʹ-na): Turnus’ sister; she tries to protect him but has to yield to Jupiter’s
will (10.439).
KRAKEN (kraʹ-ken): The name of the ship that Mnestheus captains at Anchises’ funeral
games. It finishes in second place out of four (5.116).
LABICI (la-biʹ-kee): The inhabitants of Labicum, a Latin town southeast of Rome, allied
with Turnus (7.796).
LABYRINTH: A baffling and elaborate combination of pathways and passages. Designed by

449

Daedalus for King Minos to house the Minotaur (5.588).
LADES (laʹ-deez): A Lycian, son of Imbrasus, brother of Glaucus; killed by Turnus
(12.343).
LADON (laʹ-don): An Arcadian ally of Aeneas; killed by Halaesus (10.412).
LAERTES (lye-erʹ-teez): Father of Ulysses, son of Arcesius, husband of Anticleia (3.273).
LAGUS (laʹ-gus): A Rutulian soldier of Turnus; killed by Pallas (10.380).
LAMUS (laʹ-mus): A Rutulian with the troops besieging Aeneas’ camp; killed by Nisus
(9.334).
LAMYRUS (laʹ-mi-rus): A Rutulian with the troops besieging Aeneas’ camp; killed by Nisus
(9.334).
LAOCOÖN (la-oʹ-ko-on): A Trojan priest of Neptune; publicly spoke against accepting the
Trojan Horse into the city, hurled a spear at the body of the horse, and was strangled by
sea-serpents, convincing all around him that he was being punished by Minerva (2.40).
LAODAMIA (la-o-da-meeʹ-a): The wife of Protesilaus, the first Greek to land at Troy. He
sacrificed himself for the expedition, and she committed suicide to join him in the world of
the dead (6.447).
LAOMEDON (la-oʹ-me-don): The king of Troy, son of Ilus, father of Priam. He had a
reputation for treachery because he refused to pay the agreed price after Neptune and
Apollo built the walls of Troy for him (3.247).
LAPITHS (laʹ-piths): A tribe from Thessaly, condemned to hell; at the wedding of their ruler
Pirithoüs, they fought a battle with the Centaurs but lost (6.601).
LARIDES (la-reeʹ-deez): A Rutulian ally of Turnus, twin brother of Thymber, son of Daucus;
killed by Pallas (10.390).
LARINA (la-reeʹ-na): An Italian comrade of Camilla (11.655).
LARISA (la-reeʹ-sa): A Thessalian town; the native region of Achilles.
LATAGUS (laʹ-ta-gus): A soldier of Aeneas; killed by Mezentius (10.697).
LATINUS (la-tyeʹ-nus): The king of Latium, son of Faunus, husband of Amata, father of
Lavinia (6.891).
LATIUM (laʹ-ti-um): The land between the Tiber and Campania, named so because it was
where Saturn had hidden when in exile from Jupiter (1.6).
LATONA (la-tohʹ-na): A goddess loved by Jupiter, mother of Diana and Apollo by Jupiter
(1.502).
LAURENTIAN (law-renʹ-tian): Of Laurentum (5.797).

450

LAURENTUM (law-renʹ-tum): A coastal Latin city south of Rome (8.2).
LAUSUS (lawʹ-sus): Mezentius’ son and Turnus’ comrade. He gives his own life to save that
of his father, and is killed by Aeneas (7.648).
LAVINIA (la-vinʹ-i-a): The daughter and only surviving child of Latinus and Amata (7.71).
LAVINIUM (la-vinʹ-i-um): The capital city of Latium, which Aeneas was destined to found;
named in honor of his queen, Lavinia (1.258).
LEDA (leeʹ-da): The wife of Tyndareus, king of Sparta, and the mother of Clytemnestra.
She was also the mother of Helen and the twins Castor and Pollux, by Jupiter, who
approached her in the form of a swan (1.652).
LELEGES (leʹ-le-geez): An ancient people of Asia Minor, conquered by Octavian, mentioned
by Homer as Trojan allies (8.725).
LEMNOS (lemʹ-nos): An island in the northeastern Aegean where Vulcan fell when Jupiter
flung him from Olympus. It is noted for its volcanic gases and became a site of worship for
the cult of Vulcan (8.454).
LERNA (lerʹ-na): A marsh in Greece near the city of Argos, where the Hydra lived, and
where Hercules killed it as the second of his Twelve Labors (6.287).
LETHE (leeʹ-thee): The river of forgetfulness and oblivion; one of the major rivers of the
Underworld (5.855).
LEUCASPIS (loo-kasʹ-pis): A Trojan, lost at sea (6.333).
LEUCATA (loo-kaʹ-ta): A headland at the southern end of the island Leucas, in the Ionian
Sea; holy to Apollo and the site of one of his temples (3.274).
LIBURNIA (li-burʹ-ni-a): Land of the coastal people of Illyria, inhabiting the northeastern
shores of the Adriatic (1.244).
LIBYA (liʹ-bya): A region of northern Africa bordering the Mediterranean, west of the Nile;
its capital was the city of Carthage (1.22).
LICHAS (liʹ-kas): A Latin warrior born by Caesarian section from the womb of his dead
mother; killed by Aeneas (10.315).
LICYMNIA (li-kimʹ-ni-a): A slave; the mother of Helenor (9.547).
LIGER (liʹ-ger): An Etruscan, brother of Lucagus, soldier of Turnus. Killed Emathion;
killed by Aeneas (9.571).
LIGURIA (li-goorʹ-i-a): A region in Cisalpine Gaul, north of Etruria, around the Gulf of
Genoa (11.701).
LILYBAEUM (li-li-bayʹ-um): A headland on the western tip of Sicily, notoriously a dangerous

451

route for mariners (3.706).
LIPARE (liʹ-pa-re): One of the Aeolian islands off the coast of northern Sicily; associated
with Aeolus, the king of the winds (8.416).
LIRIS (lyeʹ-ris): A Trojan killed by Camilla (11.670).
LOCRIANS (lohʹ-kri-ans): People of Locris, a region of northern Greece, whose leader had
been Ajax. When their party was shipwrecked, some settled in the toe of Italy to form a
Greek colony called Naryx (11.265).
LUCAGUS (looʹ-ka-gus): An Etruscan, soldier of Turnus, brother of Liger; killed by Aeneas
(10.575).
LUCETIUS (loo-keʹ-ti-us): A Latin warrior in the force that attacked Aeneas’ camp; killed by
Ilioneus (9.570).
LUPERCAL (looʹ-per-kal): A cave on the Palatine Hill where Romulus and Remus were
believed to have been found and nursed by a she-wolf; hallowed for its powers of fecundity
(8.344).
LYCAEUS (li-kayʹ-us): A western Arcadian mountain sacred to Pan and Jupiter.
LYCAON (li-kayʹ-un): (1) A metalworker and artist in Crete (9.304); (2) The father of
Erichaetes, a Trojan warrior (10.749).
LYCIA (liʹ-sha): A region in southern Asia Minor, between Caria and Pamphylia, famous
for its fertile soil. Allied with Troy (1.114).
LYCTOS (likʹ-tos): A Cretan city; its contingent was led by Idomeneus to Troy.
LYCURGUS (li-kurʹ-gus): The son of Dryas, king of Thrace; he attacked Dionysus and was
punished by Jupiter with blindness (3.14).
LYCUS (liʹ-kus): A Trojan, soldier of Aeneas (1.221).
LYDIA (liʹ-di-a): A region in Asia Minor settled by the predecessors of the Etruscans
(2.781).
LYNCEUS (leenʹ-kyoos): A Trojan defending Aeneas’ camp against the Rutulian attack;
killed by Turnus (9.768).
LYRNESUS (leer-neʹ-sus): A town in the Troad, near Mount Ida (10.127).
MACHAON (ma-kayʹ-on): A Greek physician concealed inside the Trojan Horse; one of the
commanders of the Thessalians at Troy (2.263).
MAENAD (mayʹ-nad): Female follower of Bacchus who roams the hills in a state of
euphoria, carrying the thyrsus (4.301).
MAEON (mayʹ-on): A Rutulian, one of the seven brothers of Cydon, fights for Turnus; killed

452

by Aeneas (10.336).
MAEONIA (may-ohʹ-ni-a): A synonym for both Lydia in Asia Minor and Etruria in Italy.
MAEOTIC (may-oʹ-tik): Of Lake Maeotis, which formed the northeastern boundary of the
Roman Empire; a region settled by fierce Scythian warriors.
MAGUS (maʹ-gus): A Rutulian in Turnus’ army, killed by Aeneas (10.521).
MAIA (mayʹ-a): The daughter of Atlas, mother of Mercury by Jupiter; one of the seven
Pleiades (1.297).
MALEA (maʹ-le-a): A stormy promontory at the southeastern tip of the Peloponnese,
dangerous for sailors (5.193).
MANLIUS (manʹ-li-us): Marcus Manlius Torquatus Capitolinus, a Roman who saved the
citadel from being destroyed by the Gauls (8.652).
MANTO (manʹ-to): The daughter of Tiresias, a prophetess, and the mother of Ocnus, who
named his city of origin Mantua after his mother (10.199).
MANTUA (manʹ-tu-a): A city on the Mincius, north of the Po River; capital of the Etruscan
alliance of twelve cities and (later) Vergil’s birthplace (10.200).
MARCELLUS (mar-kelʹ-lus): (1) Marcus Claudius Marcellus, a Roman general who fought
against the Gauls and in the Second Punic War (6.855); (2) The nephew and adopted son of
Augustus; died young (6.883).
MARICA (ma-reeʹ-ka): A Latin water-nymph, wife of Faunus, mother of King Latinus
(7.47).
MARS (marz): God of war, son of Jupiter and Juno, father of Romulus and Remus; known
to the Greeks as Ares (1.273).
MARSIAN (marʹ-si-an): Of the Marsians, a Sabellian tribe hostile to Aeneas that occupied
land to the east of Rome (7.758).
MASSICAN (masʹ-sik-an): Of Massica, a mountain slope between Campania and Latium,
famous for its vines and wine; the source of soldiers under Turnus’ command (7.726).
MASSICUS (masʹ-si-kus): An Etruscan leader allied with Aeneas (10.166).
MASSYLIAN (mas-siʹ-li-an): Of Massylia, a region in eastern Numidia (4.132).
MAXIMUS (makʹ-si-mus): Quintus Fabius Maximus, a Roman general who rescued the
Roman army after they suffered a devastating loss to Hannibal in 216 BCE (6.845).
MEDON (meeʹ-don): A Trojan, son of Antenor; seen by Aeneas among the war heroes of the
Underworld (6.483).
MEGAERA (me-gaeʹ-ra): One of the Furies, the sister of Tisiphone and Allecto (12.846).

453

MEGARA (meʹ-ga-ra): A coastal city in eastern Sicily, named for the Greek city on the
Saronic Gulf between Corinth and Athens (3.689).
MELAMPUS (me-lamʹ-pus): A companion of Hercules, father of the warriors Gyas and
Cissaeus, both of whom were killed by Aeneas (10.321).
MELIBOEAN (me-li-beeʹ-an): Of Meliboea, a Thessalian city in the kingdom of Philoctetes
(3.401).
MELITE (meʹ-li-te): A sea-nymph in Neptune’s entourage, one of the Nereïds (5.825).
MEMNON (memʹ-non): The king of the Ethiopians, son of Tithonus and Dawn. He fought for
the Trojans at Troy in armor made by Vulcan and was killed by Achilles (1.489).
MENELAUS (me-ne-laʹ-us): The son of Atreus, brother of Agamemnon, king of Sparta, true
husband of Helen (2.264).
MENESTHEUS (me-nesʹ-thyoos): A Trojan, grandson of Laomedon, son of Clytius, brother of
Acmon (10.128).
MENOETES (me-neeʹ-teez): (1) A Trojan, the pilot of Gyas on the Chimaera in the boat race
at the funeral games of Anchises (5.161); (2) A gifted Arcadian fisherman and soldier,
killed by Turnus (12.517).
MERCURY (murʹ-kyu-ree): The Greek god Hermes, son of Jupiter and Maia, messenger of
the gods and guide of the dead to the Underworld (4.276).
MEROPS (meʹ-rops): A Trojan who defended Aeneas’ camp, killed by Turnus (9.702).
MESSAPUS (mes-saʹ-pus): The son of Neptune, leader of soldiers from southern Etruria,
ruler in Italy, ally of Turnus (7.691).
METABUS (meʹ-ta-bus): The leader of the Volscians; the father of Camilla (11.539).
METISCUS (me-tisʹ-kus): A Rutulian, the charioteer of Turnus, impersonated by Juturna
(12.469).
METTUS (metʹ-tus): Mettus Fufetius, Latin leader of Alba Longa; killed for treachery by
Tullus Hostilius by being pulled apart by chariots (8.643).
MEZENTIUS (me-zenʹ-ti-us): An Etruscan king driven into exile by his people; father of
Lausus and ally of Turnus (7.647).
MIMAS (miʹ-mas): A Trojan ally of Aeneas; killed by Mezentius (10.703).
MINCIUS (minʹ-ki-us): Both the river and river god of Cisalpine Gaul in northern Italy,
rising from Lake Benacus and flowing to the Po; a source of soldiers allied with Aeneas
(10.205).
MINERVA (mi-nerʹ-va): Known to the Greeks as Athena, the goddess of wisdom, battle, and

454

the arts of spinning and weaving; she was born fully armed from Jupiter’s head and
supports the Greeks (3.531).
MINIO (miʹ-ni-oh): An Etrurian river, north of Rome; its people are supporters of Troy
(10.183).
MINOS (meeʹ-nos): The son of Jupiter and Europa, king of Crete, father of Deucalion and
Ariadne; asked Daedalus to build the labyrinth to confine the Minotaur; a judge in the
Underworld (6.14).
MINOTAUR (minʹ-o-tawr): Half man and half bull, the offspring of King Minos’ wife,
Pasiphae, and a bull; confined in the Labyrinth; killed by Theseus (6.26).
MISENUS (mye-seeʹ-nus): A Trojan, son of Aeolus, the trumpeter of Aeneas; punished by
the gods for challenging them (3.239).
MNESTHEUS (mnesʹ-thyoos): A Trojan, one of Aeneas’ captains; piloted the Kraken and
finished second in the boat race at the funeral games of Anchises, and also finished third in
the archery contest (4.288).
MONOECUS (mon-eeʹ-kus): A headland of Liguria; location of the temple for Hercules
(6.831).
MOORS: Inhabitants of the northern African region of Mauritania (4.206).
MORINI (mo-riʹ-nee): A tribe of Gauls who lived near the North Sea; conquered by
Octavian (8.727).
MUMMIUS (moomʹ-mi-us): Lucius Mummius, a Roman general who conquered and
destroyed Corinth in 146 BCE (6.836).
MURRANUS (moo-raʹ-nus): A Rutulian killed by Aeneas (12.529).
MUSAEUS (moo-zayʹ-us): A legendary Greek singer and poet of Thrace who studied under
Orpheus (6.667).
MUSE: A daughter of Jupiter, one of the nine goddesses of the arts, literature, and memory
(1.8).
MUTUSCA (mu-toosʹ-ka): A Sabine city whose soldiers fight for Turnus (7.711).
MYCENAE (mye-seeʹ-nay): A Greek city in the Argolid ruled by Agamemnon (1.285).
MYCONOS (meeʹ-ko-nos): A small Aegean island in the Cyclades (3.76).
MYGDON (migʹ-don): The father of Coroebus, engaged to Cassandra, comrade of Aeneas;
killed by Peneleus (2.342).
MYRMIDON (murʹ-mi-don): A fighter from Phthia, in Thessaly; led by Achilles at Troy
(2.7).

455

NAR: A Sabine river that flows from the foothills of the Apennines into the Tiber; known to
be swiftly flowing and foaming, and its waters contain sulfur (7.517).
NAUTES (nawʹ-teez): A Trojan elder, seer, and adviser to Aeneas, taught by Minerva
(5.704).
NAXOS (nakʹ-sos): An Aegean island, the largest of the Cyclades, south of Delos; a location
frequented by the Maenads and noted for the worship of Bacchus (3.125).
NEALCES (ne-alʹ-keez): A Trojan; killed Salius (10.753).
NEMEAN (ne-meeʹ-an): Of Nemea, a city in Greece and sector of the Argolid; home to a
massive lion, which Hercules killed as the first of his Twelve Labors (8.295).
NEOPTOLEMUS (ne-op-toʹ-le-mus): Another name for Pyrrhus, son of Achilles; too young to
be a soldier in the early stages of the war, he arrived in Troy after the death of his father
and, with Philoctetes, led the effort against the Trojans. He was married to Hermione
(2.263).
NEPTUNE (nepʹ-tyoon): The god of the sea, son of Kronos and Rhea, younger brother of
Jupiter, ally of Aeneas. Known as Poseidon to the Greeks (1.124).
NEREÏDS (neʹ-re-idz): Sea-nymphs who form the sea-lord’s entourage, daughters of Doris
and Nereus (3.74).
NEREUS (neʹ-ryoos): A god of the sea, father of Thetis, Achilles’ mother, and all of the other
Nereïds (2.418).
NERITOS (neʹ-ri-tos): An island in the Ionian Sea near Ithaca (3.272).
NERSAE (nerʹ-say): An Aequian city east of Rome, friendly to Turnus (7.744).
NESAEA (ni-zyeʹ-a): A sea-nymph, daughter of Doris and Nereus (5.826).
NIGHT: The mother of the Furies, sister of Earth, holds power over both men and gods such
that even Jupiter is afraid of her (3.512).
NILE: An Egyptian river with a delta of seven mouths that empty into the Mediterranean
Sea (6.800).
NIPHAEUS (ni-fayʹ-us): A Rutulian soldier, knocked from his horses by Aeneas (10.571).
NISUS (neeʹ-sus): A Trojan companion of Aeneas and older friend of Euryalus; killed by the
Volscians (5.294).
NOËMON (no-eeʹ-mon): A Trojan defending Aeneas’ camp against the Rutulians; killed by
Turnus (9.766).
NOMENTUM (noh-menʹ-tum): An Italian town of the Sabines, northeast of Rome (6.773).
NUMA (nooʹ-ma): (1) Numa Pompilius, the second king of Rome (6.810); (2) A Rutulian

456

killed during the foray of Nisus and Euryalus (9.454); (3) A Rutulian soldier under Turnus,
trounced by Aeneas (10.562).
NUMANUS (noo-maʹ-nus): A Rutulian, also called Remulus; husband of Turnus’ younger
sister; killed by Ascanius (9.593).
NUMICUS (noo-meeʹ-kus): A small, holy stream in Latium between Ardea and Lavinium;
Aeneas was said to have died there (7.150).
NUMIDIANS (noo-miʹ-di-anz): Wandering north African tribes whose people rode bareback
(4.41).
NUMITOR (nooʹ-mi-tor): (1) The king of Alba Longa, father of Ilia, grandfather of Romulus
and Remus (6.768); (2) A Rutulian fighting for Turnus who failed in his attempt to kill
Aeneas (10.342).
NURSIA (noorʹ-si-a): A Sabine town in the Apennines, near Umbria (7.716).
NYMPHS: Female beings who are divine, but inferior to the Olympians. They made their
homes in many environments of the natural world, such as woodlands, hills, fountains, and
streams (1.71).
NYSA (neeʹ-sa): Indian city and mountain where, according to legend, Bacchus was born
and raised; the central location of his cult and a favorite spot of the god himself (6.805).
OCNUS (okʹ-nus): The son of Manto the seer and the Tuscan Tiber river, founder of Mantua,
chieftain of troops who fought for Aeneas (10.198).
OEBALUS (eeʹ-ba-lus): The son of Telon, king of Capreae, and Sebethis, a water-nymph; he
made extensive conquests of Capreae that extended his father’s domain. Chieftain of troops
who fought for Turnus (7.733).
OECHALIA (ee-kaʹ-li-a): A town of Greece on the island of Euboea which Hercules
demolished when its king, Eurytus, rejected his request for the hand of his daughter, Iole,
in marriage (8.291).
OENOTRI (ee-nohʹ-tri): The people of Oenotria, a territory in southern Italy (1.532).
OÏLEUS (oh-eeʹ-lyoos): The father of Lesser Ajax, the Locrian king (1.41).
OLEAROS (oh-leʹ-a-ros): An island in the Aegean, named for its olives; one of the Cyclades
(3.126).
OLYMPUS (o-limʹ-pus): The mountain in Thessaly whose summit the chief gods and
goddesses call their home, hidden from mortal sight by clouds; also used as a general term
for the sky and heavens (1.779).
ONITES (o-nyeʹ-teez): A Rutulian, killed by Aeneas (12.515).
OPHELTES (o-felʹ-teez): A Trojan, father of Euryalus (9.202).

457

OPIS (ohʹ-pis): A nymph; attendant and messenger of Diana (11.533).
ORESTES (o-resʹ-teez): A grandson of Atreus, son of Agamemnon and Clytemnestra,
brother of Iphigenia and Electra. He exacted vengeance for his father’s murder at Apollo’s
command by slaying his mother and her lover, Aegisthus. For this he was haunted by his
mother’s Furies until he was saved by Athena (3.330).
ORICIA (o-riʹ-shya): A coastal city of Epirus.
ORION (o-ryeʹ-on): A legendary hunter, killed by Diana; after his death, he was put in the
skies as a constellation, called the Hunter, whose rising and setting indicated stormy
weather (1.534).
ORITHYIA (oh-ree-theeʹ-a): The daughter of Erectheus, the ancient king of Athens; wife of
Boreas, the north wind. As gifts, she gives horses (12.83).
ORNYTUS (ohrʹ-ni-tus): An Etruscan, killed by Camilla (11.677).
ORODES (o-rohʹ-deez): A Trojan soldier of Aeneas; killed by Mezentius (10.732).
ORONTES (o-rohnʹ-teez): A Trojan comrade of Aeneas, leader of the Lycians. Dies in a
storm at sea (1.114).
ORPHEUS (orfʹ-yoos): A mythical Thracian poet who could sing order and peace into the
world and attempted to retrieve his wife, Eurydice, from the Underworld (6.119).
ORSES (ohrʹ-seez): A Trojan, killed by Rapo (10.749).
ORSILOCHUS (or-siʹ-lo-kus): A Trojan, killed by Camilla (11.636).
ORTINE (orʹ-tyne): Of Ortina, an Etrurian town near where the Tiber and the Nar rivers
meet; the source of soldiers who fight on behalf of Turnus (7.716).
ORTYGIA (or-tiʹ-ji-a): (1) Another name for Delos; (2) An island in the harbor of Syracuse,
Sicily (3.692).
ORTYGIUS (or-tiʹ-ji-us): A Rutulian in the force attacking Aeneas’ camp; killed by Caeneus
(9.574).
OSCANS (osʹ-kanz): A Campanian tribe friendly to Turnus (7.730).
OSINIUS (o-syeʹ-ni-us): The king of Clusium in Etruria; his troops fight for Aeneas (10.653).
OSIRIS (o-syeʹ-rus): A Rutulian, killed by Thymbraeus (12.458).
OTHRYS (oʹ-thris): (1) The father of Panthus (2.317); (2) A snowcapped Thessalian
mountain, home of the Centaurs (7.676).
PACHYNUS (pa-keeʹ-nus): A headland at the southeasternmost tip of Sicily (3.429).
PACTOLUS (pak-tohʹ-lus): A Lydian river that looks golden and was said to carry gold dust

458

after King Midas used its waters to wash off his golden touch (10.142).
PADUA (paʹ-dyoo-a): Ancient Patavium, a city in the north of Italy near Venice, in Cisalpine
Gaul, founded by Antenor (1.247).
PADUSA (pa-dooʹ-sa): One of the seven mouths of the Po River (11.458).
PAGASUS (paʹ-ga-sus): An Etruscan comrade of Aeneas, killed by Camilla (11.670).
PALAEMON (pa-layʹ-mon): The son of Ino and Athamas, a sea-deity, part of Neptune’s
entourage (5.823).
PALAMEDES (pa-la-meeʹ-deez): A legendary Greek hero; after he discovered how Ulysses
hoped to evade service in the Trojan War, Ulysses falsely accused him of treason, and
Palamedes was put to death (2.81).
PALATINE (paʹ-la-tine): One of the seven hills of Rome, where Augustus resides in the city
(9.9).
PALICUS (pa-liʹ-kus): One of the twin sons of Jupiter and Thalia (9.585).
PALINURUS (pa-li-nooʹ-rus): The Trojan pilot of Aeneas’ fleet, swept overboard (3.201).
PALLADIUM (pal-laʹ-di-um): A miniature statue of Minerva, believed to have descended
from heaven, with which the fate of Troy, and then Rome, was linked; Ulysses and
Diomedes stole it from the temple of Pallas (2.184).
PALLANTEUM (pal-lanʹ-te-um): First an Arcadian city and Evander’s home; later, the name
of the Etruscan city Evander founded on the Palatine Hill where Rome was later built
(8.53).
PALLAS (palʹ-las): (1) A Greek name for Minerva, the Greek goddess Athena (1.39); (2) A
legendary Arcadian king, the grandfather of Evander (8.51); (3) The son of Evander, who
fights by Aeneas; killed by Turnus (8.105).
PALMUS (palʹ-mus): A soldier of Aeneas; killed by Mezentius (10.697).
PAN: The guardian god of woods and shepherds, he is half man and half goat, goat-footed
and satyr-faced (8.344).
PANDARUS (panʹ-da-rus): (1) A Trojan, son of Lycaon, brother of Eurytion; a famous
archer, he broke the truce between the Trojans and the Greeks when he shot an arrow at
Menelaus (5.495); (2) A Trojan, son of Alcanor and Iaera, brother of Bitias; killed by
Turnus (9.672).
PANOPEA (pa-no-peʹ-a): A Nereïd, in Portunus’ retinue (5.240).
PANOPES (paʹ-no-peez): A Sicilian who contended in the running race at the funeral games
of Anchises (5.301).

459

PANTAGIAS (pan-taʹ-gi-as): A river in eastern Sicily (3.688).
PANTHUS (panʹ-thus): The son of Othrys, a Trojan priest of Apollo (2.318).
PAPHOS (paʹ-fos): A city on the island of Cyprus, sacred to the goddess Venus and a famous
center of her worship (1.415).
PARIS (paʹ-ris): A Trojan, son of King Priam of Troy and his queen, Hecuba; his abduction
of Helen from Menelaus in Lacedaemon started the Trojan War (1.26).
PAROS (paʹ-ros): An Aegean island famous for its white marble; one of the Cyclades
(3.126).
PARTHENIUS (par-thenʹ-i-us): A Trojan, killed by Rapo (10.748).
PARTHENOPAEUS (par-then-o-payʹ-us): The son of Meleager and Atalanta, king of Argos,
one of the Seven Against Thebes; Aeneas meets his ghost in the Underworld (6.479).
PARTHIANS (parʹ-thi-anz): A people living in a part of modern Iraq southwest of the Caspian
Sea, famous for their archery (7.606).
PASIPHAE (pa-siʹ-fee): The queen of Crete and wife of King Minos, mother of the Minotaur
by a bull (6.24).
PATRON (paʹ-tron): An Arcadian companion of Aeneas, contender in the footrace at the
funeral games of Anchises (5.298).
PELASGIANS (pe-lazʹ-gi-anz): Extremely early inhabitants of Greece whom Vergil considers
to have inhabited the region north of Rome prior to the Etruscans (8.600).
PELIAS (peʹ-li-as): A Trojan who fights beside Aeneas shortly before Troy falls (2.435).
PELOPS (peeʹ-lops): An early king of Argos, son of Tantalus, father of Atreus, grandfather
of Agamemnon and Menelaus (2.193).
PELORUS (pe-lohʹ-rus): A headland on the northeastern tip of Sicily marking the western
side of the Strait of Messina, separating the island from mainland Italy (3.411).
PENELEUS (pe-neʹ-le-us): A Greek warrior who kills Coroebus during the fall of Troy
(2.425).
PENTHESILEA (pen-the-si-leʹ-a): The queen of the Amazon women warriors, and a Trojan
ally; killed by Achilles at Troy (1.490).
PENTHEUS (penʹ-thyoos): The king of Thebes who opposed the rites of Bacchus and, as a
punishment, was driven mad by the god and then dismembered by his mother, Agave,
while she was in a state of Bacchic frenzy (4.469).
PERGAMUM (perʹ-ga-mum): (1) The Trojan citadel, as well as a general name for the city
(1.466); (2) The name given by Aeneas to the city he founds in Crete (3.133).

460

PERIDIA (pe-ri-deeʹ-a): The mother of Onites (12.515).
PERIPHAS (peʹ-ri-fas): A Greek comrade of Pyrrhus at the fall of Troy (2.476).
PERSEUS (perʹ-syoos): A Macedonian king who claimed to be descended from Achilles
(6.839).
PETELIA (pe-teʹ-li-a): A small town of Lucania in southern Italy, founded by Philoctetes
after fleeing his Thessalian home (3.402).
PHAEACIA (fay-ayʹ-sha): An island and kingdom off the western coast of Greece, ruled by
Alcinous and Arete; the people were famous for the hospitality they offered travelers,
including Ulysses (3.291).
PHAEDRA (feeʹ-dra): The daughter of Minos, second wife of Theseus; she fell in love with
his son, Hippolytus, and committed suicide after he was killed as a result of her false
accusation of rape, which she made when he rejected her. Aeneas sees her among the
lovesick in the Underworld (6.445).
PHAËTHON (faʹ-e-thon): The son of Clymene and Helios, the god of the sun. Killed by
Jupiter’s thunderbolt when he tried to guide his father’s chariot across the sky but lost
control of the horses (5.104).
PHARUS (faʹ-rus): A Rutulian, killed by Aeneas (10.322).
PHEGEUS (feʹ-gyoos): (1) A Trojan, servant of Aeneas (5.263); (2) A Trojan defending
Aeneas’ camp, killed by Turnus (9.765); (3) A Trojan, beheaded by Turnus (12.371).
PHENEUS (feʹ-ne-us): A city in Arcadia, shown to Anchises by Evander (8.166).
PHERES (feʹ-reez): A Trojan soldier of Aeneas, killed by Halaesus (10.413).
PHILOCTETES (fi-lok-teeʹ-teez): The son of Poias, a Greek chief who fought against Troy;
after the Trojan War, he founded Petelia (3.401).
PHINEUS (feeʹ-nyoos): The son of Agenor, king of Thrace; blinded by the gods for unjustly
blinding his sons. Jupiter also sent the Harpies to torment him by stealing or contaminating
his food (3.213).
PHLEGETHON (fleʹ-guh-thon): One of the main rivers of the Underworld, whose name
translates to “flaming fire” (6.265).
PHLEGYAS (fleʹ-gi-as): The father of Ixion, ruler of Lapithae, tormented in the Underworld,
in Tartarus, for setting fire to Apollo’s temple at Delphi (6.618).
PHOEBUS (feeʹ-bus): A title for Apollo; a Greek word meaning “luminous” or “radiant” and
suggesting purity (2.318).
PHOENICIAN (fee-niʹ-shan): Of Phoenicia, a coastal strip of land between Syria and the
Mediterranean Sea, containing the towns of Tyre and Sidon; the original home of Dido

461

(1.670).
PHOENIX (feeʹ-niks): A Greek, son of Amyntor, tutor of Achilles (2.763).
PHOLOË (fohʹ-lo-e): A Cretan slave girl, the prize given by Aeneas to Sergestus after the
boat race at the funeral games of Anchises (5.285).
PHOLUS (fohʹ-lus): (1) A Centaur, killed by Hercules (8.294); (2) A Trojan, killed by
Turnus (12.341).
PHORBAS (forʹ-bas): A Trojan, shipmate of Palinurus, whom the god of sleep tries to lure to
his doom by taking Phorbas’ shape (5.841).
PHORCUS (forʹ-kus): (1) An older sea-deity, leader of the Nereïds, son of Pontus and Gaia
(5.239); (2) A Latin, father of Cydon and his brothers, seven warriors who fight against
Aeneas (10.328).
PHRYGIAN (friʹ-jan): Of the inhabitants and place of Phrygia, a region east of the Troad, in
Asia Minor, referred to derogatorily because it was held to be effeminate (1.381).
PICUS (peeʹ-kus): The Italian god of agriculture, son of Saturn, father of Faunus; he was
transformed into a woodpecker by Circe after he rejected her advances (7.48).
PILUMNUS (pee-loomʹ-nus): Son of Daunus, ancestor of Turnus, a god of the household
(9.5).
PINARIÏ (pee-naʹ-ri-ee): A clan that performed the rites for Hercules, along with the Potitii
clan (8.270).
PIRITHOÜS (pee-riʹ-tho-us): Son of Zeus, friend of Theseus, with whom he attempted to
abduct Proserpina from the Underworld; when he was caught, Pirithoüs was chained
forever as a punishment (6.393).
PISA (peeʹ-za): An Etrurian city believed to have been founded by colonists from Pisa in
Elis, Greece (10.179).
PLEMYRIUM (ple-miʹ-ri-um): A Sicilian headland south of Syracuse (3.693).
PLUTO (plooʹ-toh): The king of the Underworld, also called Orcus, Hades, and Dis (7.327).
PO (poh): The modern name of the ancient river Padus (9.680).
PODALIRIUS (po-da-leeʹ-ri-us): A Trojan, killed by Alsus (12.304).
POLITES (po-leeʹ-teez): A Trojan, the young son of Priam; killed by Pyrrhus (2.526).
POLLUX (polʹ-luks): Son of Leda and Jupiter, brother of Helen and twin of Castor; together
the twins are called the Dioscuri. The brothers alternate their days between the world above
and the Underworld (6.121).
POLYBOETES (po-li-beeʹ-teez): A Trojan priest; Aeneas meets his shade among the war

462

heroes in the Underworld (6.484).
POLYDORUS (po-li-dohʹ-rus): A Trojan, son of Priam; treacherously murdered by the king of
Thrace, Polymestor (3.45).
POLYPHEMUS (po-li-feeʹ-mus): Son of Neptune, a Cyclops who trapped Ulysses and his
crewmen and devoured their shipmates until they blinded him and made their escape
(3.641).
POMETIÏ (po-meʹ-ti-i): A Latin town inhabited by the Volscians, near the Pomptine Marshes
(6.775).
POMPEY (pomʹ-pee): The Great, a Roman general; ally of Julius Caesar and wed to Caesar’s
daughter, Julia. After her death, he became an opponent of Caesar and was defeated by
Caesar, then murdered (alluded to in 6.829).
POPULONIA (po-pu-lohʹ-ni-a): A city on the coast of Etruria and source of both Etruscan
arms and allies to Turnus (10.172).
PORSENNA (por-senʹ-na): A king of Etruria; declared war on Rome to reestablish the rule of
Tarquin (8.645).
PORTUNUS (por-tooʹ-nus): The god of harbors; assists the Scylla so that it takes first place in
the boat races at the funeral games of Anchises (5.241).
POTITIUS (po-teeʹ-ti-us): An ancestor of the Potitian clan that conducted the rites of
Hercules in Evander’s realm and later in Rome (8.269).
PRAENESTE (pray-nesʹ-te): An ancient city in Latium, near the Apennines east of Rome;
modern-day Palestrina (7.678).
PRIAM (preeʹ-am): (1) The king of Troy, son of Laomedon, father of Hector, Paris, and
others (1.458); (2) The son of Polites and grandson of Priam (5.563).
PRIVERNUM (pree-verʹ-num): A Latin city inhabited by the Volscians, southeast of Rome;
Camilla’s birthplace (11.540).
PRIVERNUS (pree-verʹ-nus): A Rutulian, killed by Capys (9.576).
PROCAS (proʹ-kas): A king of Alba Longa, presented to Aeneas by Anchises in Elysium in
the Underworld (6.767).
PROCHYTA (proʹ-ki-ta): A small island off the Campanian coast, southwest of Cape
Misenum.
PROCRIS (prohʹ-kris): The daughter of Erectheus, wife of Cephalus, who unintentionally
killed her when he mistook her rustling in the bushes for an animal after she followed him
into the forest to reassure herself of his fidelity (6.445).
PROMOLUS (proʹ-mo-lus): A Trojan, killed by Turnus (9.575).

463

PROSERPINA (pro-serʹ-pi-na): Also known as Persephone. Goddess of Spring, daughter of
Ceres, wife of Pluto, who kidnapped her from Earth and took her to be his queen in the
Underworld (4.698).
PROTEUS (proʹ-tyoos): A sea-deity and prophet able to change himself into different shapes;
a servant of Neptune (11.262).
PRYTANIS (priʹ-ta-nis): A Trojan who defended Aeneas’ camp against the Rutulian attack;
killed by Turnus (9.767).
PUNIC (pyooʹ-nik): Synonymous with Phoenician and Carthaginian (1.338).
PYGMALION (pig-mayʹ-li-on): The brother of Dido; he killed her husband, Sychaeus, and
drove her from Tyre into exile (1.346).
PYRAGMON (pee-ragʹ-mon): One of the Cyclopes in Vulcan’s forge (8.424).
PYRGI (peerʹ-gee): An Etrurian coastal city; sent troops to Aeneas (10.184).
PYRGO (peerʹ-goh): A nurse in Priam’s house (5.646).
PYRRHUS (peerʹ-us): The son of Achilles, also called Neoptolemus; killed Priam, married
Hermione and, for this, was killed by Orestes (2.470).
QUERCENS (kwerʹ-kens): A Rutulian, member of the force who storms the Trojans’ fort by
the Tiber (9.682).
QUIRINUS (kwi-reeʹ-nus): An ancient Italian deity later identified with the deified Romulus;
the words “Quirinal” or “Quirine” are used for that which relates to Quirinus or Romulus
(1.292).
QUIRITES (kwi-reeʹ-teez): The inhabitants of Cures, a Sabine town north of Rome, and the
birthplace of Numa (7.712).
RAPO (raʹ-po): A Rutulian who kills the Trojans Parthenius and Orses in battle (10.749).
REMULUS (remʹ-yoo-lus): (1) A warrior from Tibur, guest of Caedicus, who offers him
extravagant gifts (9.358); (2) The family name of Numanus, a Rutulian killed by Ascanius
(9.590); (3) A Rutulian killed by Orsilochus (11.640).
REMUS (reeʹ-mus): (1) The son of Mars and Ilia; brother of Romulus, who killed Remus for
jumping over the wall of the city that would later become Rome (1.292); (2) A Rutulian in
the force surrounding Aeneas’ camp (9.327).
RHADAMANTHUS (ra-da-manʹ-thus): The son of Jupiter and Europa, brother of Minos, ruler
and lawgiver famed for his justice in Crete. Later became a judge in the Underworld
(6.566).
RHAEBUS (rayʹ-bus): Mezentius’ horse, his name meaning “bandy-legs” in Greek (10.862).

464

RHAMNES (rahmʹ-neez): A Rutulian chief and augur, worker for Turnus, one of the forces
besieging Aeneas’ camp; killed by Nisus (9.322).
RHEA (reʹ-a): A priestess, the mother of Aventinus by Hercules; she gave birth to the boy in
secret (7.659).
RHESUS (reeʹ-sus): The Thracian king; his horses were seized by Ulysses and Diomedes
(1.470).
RHINE: The European river rising in the Swiss Alps and emptying into the North Sea.
Identical with the modern river (8.727).
RHIPEUS (reeʹ-pyoos): A Trojan ally of Aeneas during the fall of Troy; fights at Aeneas’
side (2.394).
RHOETEUM (reeʹ-te-um): A headland of the Troad slightly north of Troy (3.105).
RHOETEUS (reeʹ-tyoos): A Marsian, father of Anchemolus; soldier of Turnus; killed by
Pallas (10.388).
RHOETUS (reeʹ-tus): A Rutulian, killed by Euryalus (9.345).
ROME: The capital city of Latium and the Roman Empire (1.7).
ROMULUS (romʹ-yu-lus): The son of Mars and Ilia, twin brother of Remus, whom he kills;
legendary founder of Rome. According to myth, Romulus and Remus were nursed and
raised by a she-wolf (1.274).
ROSEAN (rohʹ-se-an): Of Rosea, a district in the Sabine territory, the fields near Lake
Velinus known in Italy for their fertility; the region supports Turnus.
RUFRAE (rooʹ-fray): A city in northern Campania, supporting Turnus (7.739).
RUMOR: The personification of public talk and circulating gossip (4.173).
RUTULIAN (ru-tulʹ-yan): Of a powerful tribe ruled by Turnus; its capital city was Ardea
(7.318).
SABAEAN (sa-beʹ-an): Of a people of the Arabian region, Saba or Sheba, famous for its
perfumes; allied with Mark Antony and Cleopatra in the battle of Actium (8.706).
SABINES (sayʹ-byne): A people of ancient central Italy, who lived in the Apennines (7.706).
SABINUS (sa-beeʹ-nus): The founder of the Sabine people of ancient central Italy, whose
women were stolen by Romulus’ men (7.179).
SACES (saʹ-keez): A Rutulian ally of Turnus (12.650).
SACRANIAN (sa-krayʹ-ni-an): Of an early Latin people who fought under Turnus (7.796).
SACRATOR (sa-kraʹ-tor): An Etruscan ally of Turnus (10.747).

465

SAGARIS (saʹ-gar-is): One of Aeneas’ slaves. Possibly later killed by Turnus (5.263).
SALAMIS (saʹ-la-mis): An island in the Saronic Gulf, its kingdom ruled by Telamon; also
home to his son, Great Ajax (8.158).
SALIÏ (saʹ-li-ee): Leaping priests of Mars who took part in the rites of Hercules (8.285).
SALIUS (saʹ-li-us): (1) An Acarnanian friend of Aeneas who enters the footrace at the
funeral games of Anchises (5.298); (2) A Rutulian, killed by Nealces (10.752).
SALLENTINE (sal-lenʹ-teen): Of the Italian Sallentini, a people near coastal Calabria.
SALMONEUS (sal-mohnʹ-yoos): The son of Aeolus, king of Elis, punished in Tartarus forever
by Jupiter because he imitated lightning with burning torches (6.585).
SAMÊ (samʹ-e): An island off the west coast of Greece in the Ionian Sea (3.271).
SAMOS (samʹ-os): An Aegean island off the central coast of Asia Minor; site of a temple to
Juno (1.15).
SAMOTHRACE (samʹ-o-thrace): An island off the southern Thracian coast; originally called
Samos (7.208).
SARNUS (sarʹ-nus): A Campanian river, east of Pompeii; soldiers from there are allied with
Turnus (7.738).
SARPEDON (sahr-peeʹ-don): The son of Jupiter and Laodamia, captained the Lycians, ally of
Troy, killed by Patroclus in the Trojan War (1.99).
SARRASTIAN (sar-rasʹ-ti-an): Of the Sarastes, a Campanian people who lived near the river
Sarnus. Their soldiers were friendly to Turnus (7.738).
SATICULA (sa-teeʹ-kew-la): A Campanian town northeast of Capua; their soldiers were
friendly to Turnus (7.729).
SATURA (saʹ-too-ra): A Latin swamp; its exact location was unknown, but it was believed to
be a part of the Pontine marshes. Its people were friendly to Turnus (7.801).
SATURN (saʹ-turn): Known to the Greeks as Kronos, god of agriculture and civilization,
father of Jupiter, Juno, Pluto, and Neptune; reigned over Saturnian land in what was called
its Age of Gold (1.569).
SATURNIA (sa-turʹ-ni-a): (1) A legendary city built by Saturn, located on the Capitoline Hill
(8.358); (2) Another title for Juno, Saturn’s daughter (9.745).
SCAEAN (skayʹ-an) GATES: The strongest and most well-known gates of Troy; they faced the
Greek camp and the sea (2.613).
SCIPIOS (skiʹ-pi-ohs): A Roman family of which two members became famous generals,
Publius Cornelius Scipio Africanus Major and Publius Cornelius Scipio Africanus Minor,

466

both of whom participated in the destruction of Carthage during the Punic Wars (6.842).
SCYLACEUM (ski-laʹ-ke-um): A city in western Italy whose coast was known to be
treacherous for sailing (3.553).
SCYLLA (skilʹ-la): A sea-monster living opposite Charybdis in the Straits of Messina that
attacked passing ships and ate sailors (1.200).
SCYLLA: The vessel that won the boat races at the funeral games of Anchises (5.122).
SCYRIANS (skeeʹ-ree-anz): People from the Aegean island of Scyros off the Euboean coast;
birthplace of Pyrrhus (2.478).
SEBETHIS (se-beʹ-this): A water-nymph, daughter of the river-god Sebethus, mother of
Oebalus by Telon, friendly to Turnus (7.734).
SELINUS (se-leeʹ-nus): A coastal city of southwestern Sicily (3.705).
SERESTUS (se-resʹ-tus): A Trojan, shipwrecked but recovered, friend of Aeneas (1.611).
SERGESTUS (ser-gesʹ-tus): Trojan captain of the Centaur in the boat races at the funeral
games of Anchises (4.121).
SERGIAN (serʹ-gyan): A Roman family named after Sergestus (5.121).
SERRANUS (ser-raʹ-nus): (1) A name for Marcus Atilius Regulus, consul in 267 BCE and
hero of the First Punic War (6.844); (2) A Rutulian, killed by Nisus (9.335).
SEVERUS (se-verʹ-us): A mountain in Sabine territory near the Apennines; its inhabitants
fought for Turnus (7.713).
SIBYL (siʹ-bil): A prophetic priestess in Cumae who led Aeneas through the Underworld
(3.443).
SICANIAN (si-kayʹ-ni-an): Of a group of ancient people who emigrated to Sicily from Italy;
their soldiers fought for Turnus (7.795).
SICILY (siʹ-si-lee): A large island just south of the tip of Italy in the Mediterranean Sea
(1.34).
SIDICINUM (si-di-keeʹ-num): A Campanian town whose citizens fought for Turnus (7.728).
SIDON (syeʹ-don): A major Phoenician city near the town of Tyre, which was an offshoot of
Sidon; its inhabitants were called Sidonians (1.619).
SIGEUM (si-geʹ-um): A headland north of Troy (2.312).
SILA (seeʹ-la): A forested mountain range in Bruttium, modern-day Calabria, in southern
Italy (12.716).
SILVANUS (sil-vaʹ-nus): A Roman god of the woodlands (8.601).

467

SILVIA (silʹ-vi-a): The daughter of Tyrrhus, whose calls for help, after Ascanius killed her
pet deer, set off the battle between the nearby Latins and Trojans (7.487).
SILVIUS (silʹ-vi-us): The youngest son of Aeneas and Lavinia; his birth was prophesied by
Anchises from the Underworld (6.763).
SILVIUS AENEAS : An Alban king and Aeneas’ namesake (6.769).
SIMOÏS (simʹ-oh-is): One of the rivers of Troy, tributary of the Xanthus (1.100).
SINON (syeʹ-non): According to Aeneas, a Greek infiltrator and master of fraud who
persuaded the Trojans to allow the Trojan Horse through the gates, resulting in the fall of
Troy (2.80).
SIRENS: Beautiful creatures with women’s faces and birds’ bodies whose song lured sailors
to their deaths on the rocks where the Sirens lived (5.864).
SLEEP: The god of sleep, son of the Underworld and Night, twin brother of Death (5.838).
SORACTE (soh-rakʹ-te): An Etrurian mountain west of the Tiber, which Apollo holds sacred
to him (7.696).
SPARTAN (sparʹ-tan): Of Sparta, a city-state of Greece, first city of Laconia, home to its
ruler, Menelaus, and his wife, Helen (1.315).
STEROPES (ster-oʹ-pees): One of the Cyclopes in Vulcan’s forge (8.424).
STHENELUS (stheʹ-ne-lus): (1) A Greek warrior concealed in the wooden horse; Diomedes’
charioteer (2.260); (2) A Trojan, killed by Turnus (12.341).
STHENIUS (stheʹ-ni-us): A Rutulian, attacked by Pallas (10.388).
STROPHADES (strohʹ-fa-deez): Ionian islands, supposedly the home of the Harpies (3.209).
STRYMON (streeʹ-mon): A river in Thrace, loved by water-birds, home of the cranes
(10.264).
STRYMONIUS (stree-monʹ-i-us): A Trojan soldier of Aeneas; his hand is severed by Halaesus
(10.414).
STYX (stiks): The main river of the Underworld, by which the gods swore binding oaths
(3.215).
SUCRO (sooʹ-kroh): A Rutulian, killed by Aeneas (12.505).
SULMO (soolʹ-moh): (1) A Rutulian in Volscens’ troop, killed by Nisus (9.412); (2) A
Rutulian, the father of four sons who fought for Turnus and were captured by Aeneas to be
killed at the funeral of Pallas (10.518).
SYBARIS (siʹ-bar-is): A Trojan, killed by Turnus (12.363).

468

SYCHAEUS (si-kayʹ-us): Dido’s husband from Phoenicia, killed by her brother, Pygmalion
(1.343).
SYMAETHUS (si-mayʹ-thus): A river in eastern Sicily on the outskirts of Mount Etna (9.584).
SYRACUSE (siʹ-ra-kyooz): The main Sicilian city in classical history (3.693).
SYRTES (seerʹ-teez): The treacherous sandbanks of the Mediterranean, off the shores of
northern Africa (6.60).
TABURNUS (ta-boorʹ-nus): Monte Taburno, a mountain range in Campania (12.716).
TAGUS (taʹ-gus): A Rutulian, one of the men under Volcens’ command; killed by Nisus
(9.418).
TALOS (taʹ-los): A Rutulian, killed by Aeneas (12.513).
TANAÏS (taʹ-na-is): A Rutulian, killed by Aeneas (12.513).
TARCHON (tarʹ-kon): An Etruscan chief allied with Aeneas (8.505).
TARENTUM (ta-renʹ-tum): A famous coastal city and bay in southern Italy on the Gulf of
Tarentum, modern name Taranto (3.551).
TARPEIA (tar-payʹ-a): A female warrior and ally of Camilla (11.656).
TARPEIAN (tar-payʹ-an): A cliff on the Capitoline Hill from which criminals were thrown to
their death; it is named after Tarpeia, the daughter of one of Romulus’ generals, who
betrayed Rome to the Sabines out of her love for the Sabine king (8.347).
TARQUIN (tarʹ-kwin): The name of both Tarquinius Priscus, the fifth king of Rome, and
Tarquinius Superbus (Tarquin the Proud), the seventh and final king of Rome, son or
grandson of Priscus (6.817).
TARQUITUS (tarʹ-kwi-tus): The son of Faunus and the wood-nymph Dryope; warrior of
Turnus, killed by Aeneas (10.550).
TARTARUS (tarʹ-ta-rus): The darkest region of the Underworld, where Jupiter keeps enemies
he has defeated, particularly the Titans (4.243).
TATIUS (taʹ-ti-us): The king of the Sabines. After the abduction of the Sabine women, he led
an expedition against the Romans in revenge, but after the intervention of the women
themselves, reconciled with Rome and shared joint kingship of both peoples with Romulus
(8.638).
TEGEAN (te-geeʹ-an): Of Tegea, an Arcadian town (5.299).
TELEBOEAN (te-le-beeʹ-an): Of an Acarnanian tribe descended from Teleboas, whom Homer
describes as pirates among the Ionian islands; they later settle on Capri (7.735).
TELON (teʹ-lon): The king of the Teleboeans on Capri, father of Oebalus by the nymph

469

Sebethis (7.734).
TENEDOS (tenʹ-e-dos): A small island in the northeastern Aegean Sea, where the Greek fleet
gathered before its final assault on Troy (2.21).
TEREUS (teʹ-ryoos): A Trojan, killed by Camilla (11.675).
TETRICA (teʹ-tri-ka): An Apennine ridge in Sabine territory; supplied troops friendly to
Turnus (7.713).
TEUCER (tooʹ-sur): (1) An ancient king of Troy, father of Bateia, the wife of Dardanus,
ancestor of Aeneas (1.236); (2) An Achaean, bastard son of Telamon, half brother of Great
Ajax, founder of the city of Salamis in Cyprus (1.619).
TEUTHRAS (tooʹ-thras): An Arcadian ally of Pallas and Aeneas (10.402).
TEUTONIC (too-tonʹ-ik): Of a savage northern tribe in Germany, the Teutons, some of whom
invaded Italy in 102 and 101 BCE.
THAEMON (thayʹ-mon): A Lycian, brother of Sarpedon and Clarus, comrade of Aeneas
(10.127).
THAMYRUS (thamʹ-i-rus): A Trojan, killed by Turnus (12.341).
THAPSUS (thapʹ-sus): A city on eastern Sicily’s coast (3.689).
THEANO (the-anʹ-oh): A Trojan woman, mother of Mimas by Amycus (10.703).
THEBES (theebz): The seven-gated capital city of Boeotia, attacked by Polynices and the
Seven (4.470).
THEMILLAS (the-milʹ-las): A Trojan; his spear grazes Privernus (9.577).
THERMODON (therʹ-moh-don): A river in Pontus flowing into the Black Sea. Frequented by
the Amazons (11.660).
THERON (theʹ-rohn): A Latin, killed by Aeneas (10.312).
THERSILOCHUS (ther-siʹ-lo-kus): (1) The son of Antenor, a Trojan warrior whom Aeneas
sees in the Underworld (6.483); (2) A Trojan, killed by Turnus (12.363).
THESEUS (theesʹ-yoos): The son of the king of Athens, Aegeus; he killed the Minotaur and
abducted Ariadne to Naxos, where he then deserted her. Later he tried to help his comrade,
Pirithoüs, abduct Persephone from the Underworld, but was caught; his punishment was to
sit in one place for eternity (6.30).
THESSANDRUS (thes-sanʹ-drus): A Greek soldier hidden in the Trojan Horse (2.260).
THETIS (theʹ-tis): A sea-goddess, daughter of Nereus, wife of Peleus, and mother of
Achilles (5.824).

470

THOAS (thohʹ-as): (1) A Greek soldier hidden in the Trojan Horse (2.262); (2) A Trojan
soldier of Aeneas, killed by Halaesus (10.416).
THRACE: A region in northwestern Greece, north of the Aegean Sea, west of the Black Sea,
favored spot of Mars (1.316).
THRONIUS (throʹ-ni-us): A Trojan, killed by Salius (10.753).
THYBRIS (theeʹ-bris): A legendary Etruscan king, after whom the river Tiber is supposed to
be named, for he died in battle on its banks (8.330).
THYMBER (theemʹ-ber): A Rutulian, son of Daunus, twin brother of Larides, killed by Pallas
while fighting in the army with Turnus (10.390).
THYMBRA (theemʹ-bra): A city in the Troad on the Xanthus River, a site of worship to
Apollo.
THYMBRAEUS (theem-brayʹ-us): A Trojan who killed the Latin Osiris (12.458).
THYMBRIS (theemʹ-bris): A veteran soldier of Aeneas. He is in the front line of defense at
the Trojans’ camp (10.125).
THYMOETES (thi-meeʹ-teez): (1) A Trojan who advocates the acceptance of the Trojan Horse
(2.32); (2) A Trojan, son of Hicetaon, who defends Aeneas’ camp and is killed by Turnus
(10.123).
TIBER (tyeʹ-bur): The main river in central Italy, which begins in the Apennines, runs south,
and has its mouth at Ostia; Rome was established along its left bank (1.13).
TIBERINUS (tee-bur-eeʹ-nus): God of the Tiber River (8.31).
TIBUR (teeʹ-bur): Ancient Latin town, northeast of Rome on the Anio River, founded by
emigrants from Greece (7.630).
TIBURTUS (tee-boorʹ-tus): One of the three Greek brothers (the other two being Catillus and
Coras) who founded Tibur, the town named after Tiburtus; all three are comrades of
Turnus (7.671).
TIGER: The ship captained by Massicus, an Etruscan allied with Aeneas (10.166).
TIMAVUS (ti-maʹ-vus): A northern Italian river that flows with a swift current into the
Adriatic Sea (1.244).
TISIPHONE (ti-siʹ-foh-nee): One of the three Furies; doles out punishments in Hades and
guards the gates that confine the damned (6.555).
TITAN (tyeʹ-tan): (1) The sun, Hyperion, one of the pre-Olympian gods (4.18); (2) One of
the other pre-Olympian gods, the children of Uranus, locked in Tartarus by Jupiter for
attempting to revolt against the Olympians (6.580).

471

TITHONUS (ti-thohʹ-nus): Lover of Aurora, son of Laomedon, brother of Priam, father of
Memnon. Aurora won him the gift of eternal life but neglected to grant him eternal youth
as well (4.584).
TITYUS (tiʹ-ti-us): A giant killed by Apollo and Diana and then doomed to eternal torment
in the Underworld for his attempt to violate their mother, Latona (6.595).
TMARIAN (tmaʹ-ri-an): Of the mountainous region Tmaria in Epirus.
TMARUS (tmaʹ-rus): A Rutulian participant in the attack on Aeneas’ camp; killed by
Aeneas’ soldiers (9.686).
TOLUMNIUS (to-loomʹ-ni-us): A Rutulian augur, ally of Turnus (11.429).
TORQUATUS (tohr-kwahʹ-tus): Titus Manlius, an early Roman consul who put his own son to
death for disobeying orders. Named for the torque (collar) he wore around his neck, a spoil
from a Gaul he killed in battle (6.825).
TRITON (tryʹ-ton): (1) A sea-god, son of Neptune, famous for blowing his conch horn
(1.144); (2) (italicized) The name of a ship transporting Tuscan troops friendly to Aeneas,
under Aulestes’ command (10.210).
TRITONIAN (trye-tohnʹ-yan): An epithet of Minerva (Athena) because she was supposed to
have been born near Lake Tritonis in north Africa (2.615).
TRIVIA (triʹ-vi-a): An epithet of Hecate (Diana), because the crossroad (trivium) was sacred
to Hecate.
TROAD (troʹ-ad): The ancient name of the Biga peninsula in the northwestern part of
Anatolia, Turkey. Its capital was Troy.
TROILUS (troyʹ-lus): A Trojan, son of Priam; killed by Achilles (1.474).
TROY: The capital city of the Troad, on the northwest coast of Asia Minor at the southern
entrance to the Hellespont (the Dardanelles). Also called Ilium (1.2).
TULLA (toolʹ-la): A comrade of Camilla (11.656).
TULLUS (toolʹ-lus): Tullus Hostilius, the third king of Rome and the conqueror and
destroyer of Alba Longa (6.812).
TURNUS (turʹ-nus): The king of the Rutulians, son of Daunus and the water-nymph Venilia,
rival of Aeneas for the hand of Lavinia; killed by Aeneas in battle (7.55).
TUSCAN (tusʹ-kan): Of the people who settled in the region of Etruria, north of Latium,
modern-day Tuscany; synonymous with Etruscan (1.67).
TUSCAN SEA: An extension of the Mediterranean Sea, bordered by the Italian peninsula in
the east. Also called the Tyrrhenian Sea (1.67).

472

TYDEUS (teeʹ-dyoos): A Greek, son of Oeneus, father of Diomedes, one of the Seven
Against Thebes, killed in the futile assault on that city (6.479).
TYPHOEUS (ti-feeʹ-us): A rebellious monster with a hundred fire-breathing heads. Jupiter
killed him with a lightning bolt and buried him either under Mount Etna or on the island
Vergil calls Inarime (modern-day Ischia) (8.298).
TYRE (tyer): A maritime city of Phoenicia, known for its deep-blue dye (1.346).
TYRES (tiʹ-reez): An Arcadian ally of Aeneas; pursued Rhoetus with Teuthras, his brother,
until Pallas killed him (10.403).
TYRRHENA (teer-reʹ-na): A Tuscan woman with an Arcadian husband, Gylippus (12.271).
TYRRHENUS (teer-reʹ-nus): An Etruscan, who killed Aconteus (11.612).
TYRRHUS (teerʹ-rus): A Latin who was the chief shepherd for King Latinus, with the help of
his sons; father of Silvia (7.484).
UCALEGON (oo-kaʹ-le-gon): A Trojan whose house is burned by the Greeks at the fall of
Troy (2.312).
UFENS (ooʹ-fens): (1) A Rutulian leader and chief of the Aequi, who led a party composed
of hunters and farmers (7.744); (2) A Latin river; natives of that region supported Turnus
(7.802).
ULYSSES (yoo-lisʹ-eez): The son of Laertes, grandson of Arcesius and Autolycus, husband of
Penelope, father of Telemachus, king of Ithaca and its surrounding islands. Sometimes
called “the Ithacan” for his home in Ithaca; renowned for his wisdom, he helped plot the
Trojan Horse. Known as Odysseus to the Greeks, he is the central figure of Homer’s
Odyssey (2.6).
UMBRIAN (oomʹ-bri-an): Of the north-central Italian region of Umbria, inhabited by the
Umbri, famous for the abilities of their hunting dogs (12.752).
UMBRO (oomʹ-bro): A Marsian warrior, ally of Turnus, priest, magician, snake charmer,
and healer; killed by a Trojan lance (7.750).
VALERUS (valʹ-er-us): An Etruscan, who conquers Agis (10.752).
VELIA (veʹ-li-a): A city on the western Lucanian coast, south of Salerno (6.366).
VELINUS (ve-leeʹ-nus): A lake and river in the Sabines’ region, with sulfurous waters. It
supplies soldiers to Turnus (7.517).
VENILIA (ve-neeʹ-li-a): A sea-nymph, mother of Turnus by Daunus (10.76).
VENULUS (venʹ-u-lus): A Latin; Turnus sends him as a messenger to Diomedes to appeal for
help (8.9).

473

VENUS (veeʹ-nus): Known to the Greeks as Aphrodite, goddess of love and beauty, daughter
of Jupiter and Dione, wife of Vulcan, mother of Aeneas by Anchises, and of Amor.
Devoted to the Trojans (1.227).
VESTA (vesʹ-ta): The goddess of the hearth, the home, and the family; her hearth fire was
always burning (1.292).
VESULUS (vesʹ-u-lus): A mountain of the Italian Alps in Liguria, source of the Po River
(10.709).
VIRBIUS (veerʹ-bi-us): (1) The son of Hippolytus and Aricia, ally of Turnus (7.761); (2) The
name given to Hippolytus after he is resurrected (7.777).
VOLCENS (vohlʹ-kens): A Latin commander of a cavalry unit sent as reinforcement to
Turnus; father of Camers (9.368).
VOLSCIAN (vohlʹ-ski-an): Of the Latin tribe the Volscians, who inhabited Latium, south of
Rome, and supported Turnus (11.800).
VOLTURNUS (vohl-toornʹ-us): A Campanian river emptying into the Tuscan Sea (7.729).
VOLUSUS (voh-looʹ-sus): A Rutulian, commander of the Volscians, ally of Turnus (11.463).
VULCAN (vulʹ-kan): The god of fire and metalwork, son of Juno, husband of Venus. With
the help of his Cyclops assistants, he forged the shield of Aeneas upon Venus’ request.
Known to the Greeks as Hephaestus (7.79).
VULCANIA (vul-kaʹ-ni-a): A volcanic island off the northeastern coast of Sicily where
Vulcan’s home is located, along with his forge, staffed by the Cyclopes (8.422).
XANTHUS (ksanʹ-thus): (1) A river of the Troad, tributary of the river Simoïs (1.473); (2) A
brook in Epirus (3.350); (3) A Lycian river, near the town of the same name (4.144).
ZACYNTHUS (za-kinʹ-thus): An island off the western Greek coast, in the Ionian Sea and in
Ulysses’ kingdom (3.270).
ZEPHYR (zeʹ-fir): (1) In general, the collective name for the West Winds, both those
disruptive and those advantageous to mariners (3.120); (2) The particular personification of
the mild and warm Italian wind that brought about the melting of the snows and thus the
beginning of spring (1.131).

474

BY SHADI BARTSCH
The Aeneid (TRANSLATOR)
The Mirror of the Self
Persius
Ideology in Cold Blood
Decoding the Ancient Novel
Actors in the Audience

475

ABOUT THE AUTHOR

SHADI BARTSCH is the Helen A. Regenstein Distinguished Service Professor at the
University of Chicago. Her research focus is on Roman imperial literature, the history of
rhetoric and philosophy, and the reception of the Western classical tradition in
contemporary China. She is the author of five books on the ancient novel, Neronian
literature, political theatricality, and Stoic philosophy, the most recent of which is Persius:
A Study in Food, Philosophy, and the Figural (winner of the 2016 Goodwin Award of
Merit). She has also edited or co-edited seven wide-ranging essay collections (two of them
Cambridge Companions) and the Seneca in Translation series from the University of
Chicago, for which she translated three Senecan plays. Bartsch is now writing a book on
the contemporary Chinese reception of ancient Greek political philosophy. She has been a
Guggenheim fellow, edits the journal KNOW, and has held visiting scholar positions in St.
Andrews, Taipei, and Rome. Starting in academic year 2015, she has directed the
Stevanovich Institute on the Formation of Knowledge, whose purpose is to explore the
historical and social contexts in which knowledge is created, legitimized, and circulated.
ShadiBartsch.com
Twitter: @ShadiBartsch

476

477

What’s next on
your reading list?
Discover your next
great read!
Get personalized book picks and up-to-date news about this author.

Sign up now.

478

