
Sing, goddess, the anger of Peleus’ son Achilleus
and its devastation, which put pains thousandfold upon the Achaians,
hurled in their multitudes to the house of Hades strong souls
of heroes, but gave their bodies to be the delicate feasting
of dogs, of all birds, and the will of Zeus was accomplished
since that time when first there stood in division of conflict
Atreus’ son the lord of men and brilliant Achilleus.
What god was it then set them together in bitter collision?
Zeus’ son and Leto’s, Apollo, who in anger at the king drove
the foul pestilence along the host, and the people perished,
since Atreus’ son had dishonored Chryses, priest of Apollo,
when he came beside the fast ships of the Achaians to ransom
back his daughter, carrying gifts beyond count and holding
in his hands wound on a staff of gold the ribbons of Apollo
who strikes from afar, and supplicated all the Achaians,
but above all Atreus’ two sons, the marshals of the people:
“Sons of Atreus and you other strong-greaved Achaians,
to you may the gods grant who have their homes on Olympos
Priam’s city to be plundered and a fair homecoming thereafter,
but may you give me back my own daughter and take the ransom,
giving honor to Zeus’ son who strikes from afar, Apollo.”
Then all the rest of the Achaians cried out in favor
that the priest be respected and the shining ransom be taken;
yet this pleased not the heart of Atreus’ son Agamemnon,
but harshly he drove him away with a strong order upon him:
“Never let me find you again, old sir, near our hollow
ships, neither lingering now nor coming again hereafter,

30

35

40

45

50

for fear your staff and the god’s ribbons help you no longer.
The girl I will not give back; sooner will old age come upon her
in my own house, in Argos, far from her own land, going
up and down by the loom and being in my bed as my companion.
So go now, do not make me angry; so you will be safer.”
So he spoke, and the old man in terror obeyed him
and went silently away beside the murmuring sea beach.
Over and over the old man prayed as he walked in solitude
to King Apollo, whom Leto of the lovely hair bore: “Hear me,
lord of the silver bow who set your power about Chryse
and Killa the sacrosanct, who are lord in strength over Tenedos,
Smintheus, if ever it pleased your heart that I built your temple,
if ever it pleased you that I burned all the rich thigh pieces
of bulls, of goats, then bring to pass this wish I pray for:
let your arrows make the Danaäns pay for my tears shed.”
So he spoke in prayer, and Phoibos Apollo heard him,
and strode down along the pinnacles of Olympos, angered
in his heart, carrying across his shoulders the bow and the hooded
quiver; and the shafts clashed on the shoulders of the god walking
angrily. He came as night comes down and knelt then
apart and opposite the ships and let go an arrow.
Terrible was the clash that rose from the bow of silver.
First he went after the mules and the circling hounds, then let go
a tearing arrow against the men themselves and struck them.
The corpse fires burned everywhere and did not stop burning.

Nine days up and down the host ranged the god’s arrows,
but on the tenth Achilleus called the people to assembly;
55 a thing put into his mind by the goddess of the white arms, Hera,
who had pity upon the Danaäns when she saw them dying.
Now when they were all assembled in one place together,
Achilleus of the swift feet stood up among them and spoke forth:
“Son of Atreus, I believe now that straggling backward
60 we must make our way home if we can even escape death,
if fighting now must crush the Achaians and the plague likewise.
No, come, let us ask some holy man, some prophet,

65

70

75

80

85

90

95

even an interpreter of dreams, since a dream also
comes from Zeus, who can tell why Phoibos Apollo is so angry,
if for the sake of some vow, some hecatomb he blames us,
if given the fragrant smoke of lambs, of he goats, somehow
he can be made willing to beat the bane aside from us.”
He spoke thus and sat down again, and among them stood up
Kalchas, Thestor’s son, far the best of the bird interpreters,
who knew all things that were, the things to come and the things past,
who guided into the land of Ilion the ships of the Achaians
through that seercraft of his own that Phoibos Apollo gave him.
He in kind intention toward all stood forth and addressed them:
“You have bidden me, Achilleus beloved of Zeus, to explain to
you this anger of Apollo the lord who strikes from afar. Then
I will speak; yet make me a promise and swear before me
readily by word and work of your hands to defend me,
since I believe I shall make a man angry who holds great kingship
over the men of Argos, and all the Achaians obey him.
For a king when he is angry with a man beneath him is too strong,
and suppose even for the day itself he swallow down his anger,
he still keeps bitterness that remains until its fulfillment
deep in his chest. Speak forth then, tell me if you will protect me.”
Then in answer again spoke Achilleus of the swift feet:
“Speak, interpreting whatever you know, and fear nothing.
In the name of Apollo beloved of Zeus to whom you, Kalchas,
make your prayers when you interpret the gods’ will to the Danaäns,
no man so long as I am alive above earth and see daylight
shall lay the weight of his hands on you beside the hollow ships,
not one of all the Danaäns, even if you mean Agamemnon,
who now claims to be far the greatest of all the Achaians.”
At this the blameless seer took courage again and spoke forth:
“No, it is not for the sake of some vow or hecatomb he blames us,
but for the sake of his priest whom Agamemnon dishonored
and would not give him back his daughter nor accept the ransom.
Therefore the archer sent griefs against us and will send them
still, nor sooner thrust back the shameful plague from the Danaäns
until we give the glancing-eyed girl back to her father

without price, without ransom, and lead also a blessed hecatomb
100 to Chryse; thus we might propitiate and persuade him.”
He spoke thus and sat down again, and among them stood up
Atreus’ son the hero wide-ruling Agamemnon
raging, the heart within filled black to the brim with anger
from beneath, but his two eyes showed like fire in their blazing.
105 First of all he eyed Kalchas bitterly and spoke to him:
“Seer of evil: never yet have you told me a good thing.
Always the evil things are dear to your heart to prophesy,
but nothing excellent have you said nor ever accomplished.
Now once more you make divination to the Danaäns, argue
110 forth your reason why he who strikes from afar afflicts them,
because I for the sake of the girl Chryseis would not take
the shining ransom; and indeed I wish greatly to have her
in my own house; since I like her better than Klytaimestra
my own wife, for in truth she is no way inferior,
115 neither in build nor stature nor wit, not in accomplishment.
Still I am willing to give her back, if such is the best way.
I myself desire that my people be safe, not perish.
Find me then some prize that shall be my own, lest I only
among the Argives go without, since that were unfitting;
120 you are all witnesses to this thing, that my prize goes elsewhere.”
Then in answer again spoke brilliant swift-footed Achilleus:
“Son of Atreus, most lordly, greediest for gain of all men,
how shall the great-hearted Achaians give you a prize now?
There is no great store of things lying about I know of.
125 But what we took from the cities by storm has been distributed;
it is unbecoming for the people to call back things once given.
No, for the present give the girl back to the god; we Achaians
thrice and four times over will repay you, if ever Zeus gives
into our hands the strong-walled citadel of Troy to be plundered.”
130 Then in answer again spoke powerful Agamemnon:
“Not that way, good fighter though you be, godlike Achilleus,
strive to cheat, for you will not deceive, you will not persuade me.
What do you want? To keep your own prize and have me sit here
lacking one? Are you ordering me to give this girl back?

135 Either the great-hearted Achaians shall give me a new prize
chosen according to my desire to atone for the girl lost,
or else if they will not give me one I myself shall take her,
your own prize, or that of Aias, or that of Odysseus,
going myself in person; and he whom I visit will be bitter.
140 Still, these are things we shall deliberate again hereafter.
Come, now, we must haul a black ship down to the bright sea,
and assemble rowers enough for it, and put on board it
the hecatomb, and the girl herself, Chryseis of the fair cheeks,
and let there be one responsible man in charge of her,
145 either Aias or Idomeneus or brilliant Odysseus,
or you yourself, son of Peleus, most terrifying of all men,
to reconcile by accomplishing sacrifice the archer.”
Then looking darkly at him Achilleus of the swift feet spoke:
“O wrapped in shamelessness, with your mind forever on profit,
150 how shall any one of the Achaians readily obey you
either to go on a journey or to fight men strongly in battle?
I for my part did not come here for the sake of the Trojan
spearmen to fight against them, since to me they have done nothing.
Never yet have they driven away my cattle or my horses,
155 never in Phthia where the soil is rich and men grow great did they
spoil my harvest, since indeed there is much that lies between us,
the shadowy mountains and the echoing sea; but for your sake,
O great shamelessness, we followed, to do you favor,
you with the dog’s eyes, to win your honor and Menelaos’
160 from the Trojans. You forget all this or else you care nothing.
And now my prize you threaten in person to strip from me,
for whom I labored much, the gift of the sons of the Achaians.
Never, when the Achaians sack some well-founded citadel
of the Trojans, do I have a prize that is equal to your prize.
165 Always the greater part of the painful fighting is the work of
my hands; but when the time comes to distribute the booty
yours is far the greater reward, and I with some small thing
yet dear to me go back to my ships when I am weary with fighting.
Now I am returning to Phthia, since it is much better
170 to go home again with my curved ships, and I am minded no longer

to stay here dishonored and pile up your wealth and your luxury.”
Then answered him in turn the lord of men Agamemnon:
“Run away by all means if your heart drives you. I will not
entreat you to stay here for my sake. There are others with me
175 who will do me honor, and above all Zeus of the counsels.
To me you are the most hateful of all the kings whom the gods love.
Forever quarreling is dear to your heart, and wars and battles;
and if you are very strong indeed, that is a god’s gift.
Go home then with your own ships and your own companions,
180 be king over the Myrmidons.I care nothing about you.
I take no account of your anger. But here is my threat to you.
Even as Phoibos Apollo is taking away my Chryseis.
I shall convey her back in my own ship, with my own
followers; but I shall take the fair-cheeked Briseis,
185 your prize, I myself going to your shelter, that you may learn well
how much greater I am than you, and another man may shrink back
from likening himself to me and contending against me.”
So he spoke. And the anger came on Peleus’ son, and within
his shaggy breast the heart was divided two ways, pondering
190 whether to draw from beside his thigh the sharp sword, driving
away all those who stood between and kill the son of Atreus,
or else to check the spleen within and keep down his anger.
Now as he weighed in mind and spirit these two courses
and was drawing from its scabbard the great sword, Athene descended
195 from the sky. For Hera the goddess of the white arms sent her,
who loved both men equally in her heart and cared for them.
The goddess standing behind Peleus’ son caught him by the fair hair,
appearing to him only, for no man of the others saw her.
Achilleus in amazement turned about, and straightway
200 knew Pallas Athene and the terrible eyes shining.
He uttered winged words and addressed her: “Why have you come
now,
O child of Zeus of the aegis, once more? Is it that you may see
the outrageousness of the son of Atreus Agamemnon?
Yet will I tell you this thing, and I think it shall be accomplished.

205 By such acts of arrogance he may even lose his own life.”
Then in answer the goddess gray-eyed Athene spoke to him:
“I have come down to stay your anger—but will you obey me?—from
the sky;
and the goddess of the white arms Hera sent me,
who loves both of you equally in her heart and cares for you.
210 Come then, do not take your sword in your hand, keep clear of
fighting,
though indeed with words you may abuse him, and it will be that way.
And this also will I tell you and it will be a thing accomplished.
Some day three times over such shining gifts shall be given you
by reason of this outrage. Hold your hand then, and obey us.”
215 Then in answer again spoke Achilleus of the swift feet:
“Goddess, it is necessary that I obey the word of you two,
angry though I am in my heart. So it will be better.
If any man obeys the gods, they listen to him also.”
He spoke, and laid his heavy hand on the silver sword hilt
220 and thrust the great blade back into the scabbard nor disobeyed
the word of Athene. And she went back again to Olympos
to the house of Zeus of the aegis with the other divinities.
But Peleus’ son once again in words of derision
spoke to Atreides, and did not yet let go of his anger:
225 “You wine sack, with a dog’s eyes, with a deer’s heart. Never
once have you taken courage in your heart to arm with your people
for battle, or go into ambuscade with the best of the Achaians.
No, for in such things you see death. Far better to your mind
is it, all along the widespread host of the Achaians
230 to take away the gifts of any man who speaks up against you.
King who feed on your people, since you rule nonentities;
otherwise, son of Atreus, this were your last outrage.
But I will tell you this and swear a great oath upon it:
in the name of this scepter, which never again will bear leaf nor
235 branch, now that it has left behind the cut stump in the mountains,
nor shall it ever blossom again, since the bronze blade stripped
bark and leafage, and now at last the sons of the Achaians

carry it in their hands in state when they administer
the justice of Zeus. And this shall be a great oath before you:
240 some day longing for Achilleus will come to the sons of the Achaians,
all of them. Then stricken at heart though you be, you will be able
to do nothing, when in their numbers before man-slaughtering Hektor
they drop and die. And then you will eat out the heart within you
in sorrow, that you did no honor to the best of the Achaians.”
245 Thus spoke Peleus’ son and dashed to the ground the scepter
studded with golden nails, and sat down again. But Atreides
raged still on the other side, and between them
Nestor the fair-spoken rose up, the lucid speaker of Pylos,
from whose lips the streams of words ran sweeter than honey.
250 In his time two generations of mortal men had perished,
those who had grown up with him and they who had been born to
these in sacred Pylos, and he was king in the third age.
He in kind intention toward both stood forth and addressed them:
“Oh, for shame. Great sorrow comes on the land of Achaia.
255 Now might Priam and the sons of Priam in truth be happy,
and all the rest of the Trojans be visited in their hearts with gladness,
were they to hear all this wherein you two are quarreling,
you, who surpass all Danaäns in council, in fighting.
Yet be persuaded. Both of you are younger than I am.
260 Yes, and in my time I have dealt with better men than
you are, and never once did they disregard me. Never
yet have I seen nor shall see again such men as these were,
men like Peirithoös, and Dryas, shepherd of the people,
Kaineus and Exadios, godlike Polyphemos,
265 or Theseus, Aigeus’ son, in the likeness of the immortals.
These were the strongest generation of earth-born mortals,
the strongest, and they fought against the strongest, the beast men
living within the mountains, and terribly they destroyed them.
I was of the company of these men, coming from Pylos,
270 a long way from a distant land, since they had summoned me.
And I fought single-handed, yet against such men no one
of the mortals now alive upon earth could do battle. And also
these listened to the counsels I gave and heeded my bidding.

Do you also obey, since to be persuaded is better.
275 You, great man that you are, yet do not take the girl away
but let her be, a prize as the sons of the Achaians gave her
first. Nor, son of Peleus, think to match your strength with
the king, since never equal with the rest is the portion
of honor of the scattered king to whom Zeus gives magnificence. Even
280 though you are the stronger man, and the mother who bore you was
immortal,
yet is this man greater who is lord over more than you rule.
Son of Atreus, give up your anger; even I entreat you
to give over your bitterness against Achilleus, he who
stands as a great bulwark of battle over all the Achaians.”
285 Then in answer again spoke powerful Agamemnon:
“Yes, old sir, all this you have said is fair and orderly.
Yet here is a man who wishes to be above all others,
who wishes to hold power over all, and to be lord of
all, and give them their orders, yet I think one will not obey him.
290 And if the everlasting gods have made him a spearman,
yet they have not given him the right to speak abusively.”
Then looking at him darkly brilliant Achilleus answered him:
“So must I be called of no account and a coward
if I must carry out every order you may happen to give me.
295 Tell other men to do these things, but give me no more
commands, since I for my part have no intention to obey you.
And put away in your thoughts this other thing I tell you.
With my hands I will not fight for the girl’s sake, neither
with you nor any other man, since you take her away who gave her.
300 But of all the other things that are mine beside my fast black
ship, you shall take nothing away against my pleasure.
Come, then, only try it, that these others may see also;
instantly your own black blood will stain my spearpoint.”
So these two after battling in words of contention
305 stood up, and broke the assembly beside the ships of the Achaians.
Peleus’ son went back to his balanced ships and his shelter
with Patroklos, Menoitios’ son, and his own companions.

But the son of Atreus drew a fast ship down to the water
and allotted into it twenty rowers and put on board it
310 the hecatomb for the god and Chryseis of the fair cheeks
leading her by the hand. And in charge went crafty Odysseus.
These then putting out went over the ways of the water
while Atreus’ son told his people to wash off their defilement.
And they washed it away and threw the washings into the salt sea.
315 Then they accomplished perfect hecatombs to Apollo,
of bulls and goats along the beach of the barren salt sea.
The savor of the burning swept in circles up to the bright sky.
Thus these were busy about the army. But Agamemnon
did not give up his anger and the first threat he made to Achilleus,
320 but to Talthybios he gave his orders and Eurybates
who were heralds and hard-working henchmen to him: “Go now
to the shelter of Peleus’ son Achilleus, to bring back
Briseis of the fair cheeks leading her by the hand. And if he
will not give her, I must come in person to take her
325 with many men behind me, and it will be the worse for him.”
He spoke and sent them forth with this strong order upon them.
They went against their will beside the beach of the barren
salt sea, and came to the shelters and the ships of the Myrmidons.
The man himself they found beside his shelter and his black ship
330 sitting. And Achilleus took no joy at all when he saw them.
These two terrified and in awe of the king stood waiting
quietly, and did not speak a word at all nor question him.
But he knew the whole matter in his own heart, and spoke first:
“Welcome, heralds, messengers of Zeus and of mortals.
335 Draw near. You are not to blame in my sight, but Agamemnon
who sent the two of you here for the sake of the girl Briseis.
Go then, illustrious Patroklos, and bring the girl forth
and give her to these to be taken away. Yet let them be witnesses
in the sight of the blessed gods, in the sight of mortal
340 men, and of this cruel king, if ever hereafter
there shall be need of me to beat back the shameful destruction
from the rest. For surely in ruinous heart he makes sacrifice

and has not wit enough to look behind and before him
that the Achaians fighting beside their ships shall not perish.”
345 So he spoke, and Patroklos obeyed his beloved companion.
He led forth from the hut Briseis of the fair cheeks and gave her
to be taken away; and they walked back beside the ships of the
Achaians,
and the woman all unwilling went with them still. But Achilleus
weeping went and sat in sorrow apart from his companions
350 beside the beach of the gray sea looking out on the infinite water.
Many times stretching forth his hands he called on his mother:
“Since, my mother, you bore me to be a man with a short life,
therefore Zeus of the loud thunder on Olympos should grant me
honor at least. But now he has given me not even a little.
355 Now the son of Atreus, powerful Agamemnon,
has dishonored me, since he has taken away my prize and keeps it.”
So he spoke in tears and the lady his mother heard him
as she sat in the depths of the sea at the side of her aged father,
and lightly she emerged like a mist from the gray water.
360 She came and sat beside him as he wept, and stroked him
with her hand and called him by name and spoke to him: “Why then,
child, do you lament? What sorrow has come to your heart now?
Tell me, do not hide it in your mind, and thus we shall both know.”
Sighing heavily Achilleus of the swift feet answered her:
365 “You know; since you know why must I tell you all this?
We went against Thebe, the sacred city of Eëtion,
and the city we sacked, and carried everything back to this place,
and the sons of the Achaians made a fair distribution
and for Atreus’ son they chose out Chryseis of the fair cheeks.
370 Then Chryses, priest of him who strikes from afar, Apollo,
came beside the fast ships of the bronze-armored Achaians to ransom
back his daughter, carrying gifts beyond count and holding
in his hands wound on a staff of gold the ribbons of Apollo
who strikes from afar, and supplicated all the Achaians,
375 but above all Atreus’ two sons, the marshals of the people.
Then all the rest of the Achaians cried out in favor
that the priest be respected and the shining ransom be taken;

yet this pleased not the heart of Atreus’ son Agamemnon,
but harshly he sent him away with a strong order upon him.
380 The old man went back again in anger, but Apollo
listened to his prayer, since he was very dear to him, and let go
the wicked arrow against the Argives. And now the people
were dying one after another while the god’s shafts ranged
everywhere along the wide host of the Achaians, till the seer
385 knowing well the truth interpreted the designs of the archer.
It was I first of all urged then the god’s appeasement;
and the anger took hold of Atreus’ son, and in speed standing
he uttered his threat against me, and now it is a thing accomplished.
For the girl the glancing-eyed Achaians are taking to Chryse
390 in a fast ship, also carrying to the king presents. But even
now the heralds went away from my shelter leading
Briseus’ daughter, whom the sons of the Achaians gave me.
You then, if you have power to, protect your own son, going
to Olympos and supplicating Zeus, if ever before now
395 either by word you comforted Zeus’ heart or by action.
Since it is many times in my father’s halls I have heard you
making claims, when you said you only among the immortals
beat aside shameful destruction from Kronos’ son the dark-misted,
that time when all the other Olympians sought to bind him,
400 Hera and Poseidon and Pallas Athene. Then you,
goddess, went and set him free from his shackles, summoning
in speed the creature of the hundred hands to tall Olympos,
that creature the gods name Briareus, but all men
Aigaios’ son, but he is far greater in strength than his father.
405 He rejoicing in the glory of it sat down by Kronion,
and the rest of the blessed gods were frightened and gave up binding
him.
Sit beside him and take his knees and remind him of these things
now, if perhaps he might be willing to help the Trojans,
and pin the Achaians back against the ships and the water,
410 dying, so that thus they may all have profit of their own king,
that Atreus’ son wide-ruling Agamemnon may recognize
his madness, that he did no honor to the best of the Achaians.”

Thetis answered him then letting the tears fall: “Ah me,
my child. Your birth was bitterness. Why did I raise you?
415 If only you could sit by your ships untroubled, not weeping,
since indeed your lifetime is to be short, of no length.
Now it has befallen that your life must be brief and bitter
beyond all men’s. To a bad destiny I bore you in my chambers.
But I will go to cloud-dark Olympos and ask this
420 thing of Zeus who delights in the thunder. Perhaps he will do it.
Do you therefore continuing to sit by your swift ships
be angry at the Achaians and stay away from all fighting.
For Zeus went to the blameless Aithiopians at the Ocean
yesterday to feast, and the rest of the gods went with him.
425 On the twelfth day he will be coming back to Olympos,
and then I will go for your sake to the house of Zeus, bronze-founded,
and take him by the knees and I think I can persuade him.”
So speaking she went away from that place and left him
sorrowing in his heart for the sake of the fair-girdled woman
430 whom they were taking by force against his will. But Odysseus
meanwhile drew near to Chryse conveying the sacred hecatomb.
These when they were inside the many-hollowed harbor
took down and gathered together the sails and stowed them in the black
ship,
let down mast by the forestays, and settled it into the mast crutch
435 easily, and rowed her in with oars to the mooring.
They threw over the anchor stones and made fast the stern cables
and themselves stepped out onto the break of the sea beach,
and led forth the hecatomb to the archer Apollo,
and Chryseis herself stepped forth from the sea-going vessel.
440 Odysseus of the many designs guided her to the altar
and left her in her father’s arms and spoke a word to him:
“Chryses, I was sent here by the lord of men Agamemnon
to lead back your daughter and accomplish a sacred hecatomb
to Apollo on behalf of the Danaäns, that we may propitiate
445 the lord who has heaped unhappiness and tears on the Argives.”
He spoke, and left her in his arms. And he received gladly

his beloved child. And the men arranged the sacred hecatomb
for the god in orderly fashion around the strong-founded altar.
Next they washed their hands and took up the scattering barley.
450 Standing among them with lifted arms Chryses prayed in a great voice:
“Hear me, lord of the silver bow, who set your power about
Chryse and Killa the sacrosanct, who are lord in strength over
Tenedos; if once before you listened to my prayers
and did me honor and smote strongly the host of the Achaians,
455 so one more time bring to pass the wish that I pray for.
Beat aside at last the shameful plague from the Danaäns.”
So he spoke in prayer, and Phoibos Apollo heard him.
And when all had made prayer and flung down the scattering barley
first they drew back the victims’ heads and slaughtered them and
skinned them,
460 and cut away the meat from the thighs and wrapped them in fat,
making a double fold, and laid shreds of flesh upon them.
The old man burned these on a cleft stick and poured the gleaming
wine over, while the young men with forks in their hands stood about
him.
But when they had burned the thigh pieces and tasted the vitals,
465 they cut all the remainder into pieces and spitted them
and roasted all carefully and took off the pieces.
Then after they had finished the work and got the feast ready
they feasted, nor was any man’s hunger denied a fair portion.
But when they had put away their desire for eating and drinking,
470 the young men filled the mixing bowls with pure wine, passing
a portion to all, when they had offered drink in the goblets.
All day long they propitiated the god with singing,
chanting a splendid hymn to Apollo, these young Achaians,
singing to the one who works from afar, who listened in gladness.
475 Afterward when the sun went down and darkness came onward
they lay down and slept beside the ship’s stern cables.
But when the young Dawn showed again with her rosy fingers,
they put forth to sea toward the wide camp of the Achaians.
And Apollo who works from afar sent them a favoring stern wind.
480 They set up the mast again and spread on it the white sails,

and the wind blew into the middle of the sail, and at the cutwater
a blue wave rose and sang strongly as the ship went onward.
She ran swiftly cutting across the swell her pathway.
But when they had come back to the wide camp of the Achaians
485 they hauled the black ship up on the mainland, high up
on the sand, and underneath her they fixed the long props.
Afterward they scattered to their own ships and their shelters.
But that other still sat in anger beside his swift ships,
Peleus’ son divinely born, Achilleus of the swift feet.
490 Never now would he go to assemblies where men win glory,
never more into battle, but continued to waste his heart out
sitting there, though he longed always for the clamor and fighting.
But when the twelfth dawn after this day appeared, the gods who
live forever came back to Olympos all in a body
495 and Zeus led them; nor did Thetis forget the entreaties
of her son, but she emerged from the sea’s waves early
in the morning and went up to the tall sky and Olympos.
She found Kronos’ broad-browed son apart from the others
sitting upon the highest peak of rugged Olympos.
500 She came and sat beside him with her left hand embracing
his knees, but took him underneath the chin with her right hand
and spoke in supplication to lord Zeus son of Kronos:
“Father Zeus, if ever before in word or action
I did you favor among the immortals, now grant what I ask for.
505 Now give honor to my son short-lived beyond all other
mortals. Since even now the lord of men Agamemnon
dishonors him, who has taken away his prize and keeps it.
Zeus of the counsels, lord of Olympos, now do him honor.
So long put strength into the Trojans, until the Achaians
510 give my son his rights, and his honor is increased among them.”
She spoke thus. But Zeus who gathers the clouds made no answer
but sat in silence a long time. And Thetis, as she had taken
his knees, clung fast to them and urged once more her question:
“Bend your head and promise me to accomplish this thing,
515 or else refuse it; you have nothing to fear, that I may know

by how much I am the most dishonored of all gods.”
Deeply disturbed Zeus who gathers the clouds answered her:
“This is a disastrous matter when you set me in conflict
with Hera, and she troubles me with recriminations.
520 Since even as things are, forever among the immortals
she is at me and speaks of how I help the Trojans in battle.
Even so, go back again now, go away, for fear she
see us. I will look to these things that they be accomplished.
See then, I will bend my head that you may believe me.
525 For this among the immortal gods is the mightiest witness
I can give, and nothing I do shall be vain nor revocable
nor a thing unfulfilled when I bend my head in assent to it.”
He spoke, the son of Kronos, and nodded his head with the dark
brows,
and the immortally anointed hair of the great god
530 swept from his divine head, and all Olympos was shaken.
So these two who had made their plans separated, and Thetis
leapt down again from shining Olympos into the sea’s depth,
but Zeus went back to his own house, and all the gods rose up
from their chairs to greet the coming of their father; not one had
courage
535 to keep his place as the father advanced, but stood up to greet him.
Thus he took his place on the throne; yet Hera was not
ignorant, having seen how he had been plotting counsels
with Thetis the silver-footed, the daughter of the sea’s ancient,
and at once she spoke revilingly to Zeus son of Kronos:
540 “Treacherous one, what god has been plotting counsels with you?
Always it is dear to your heart in my absence to think of
secret things and decide upon them. Never have you patience
frankly to speak forth to me the thing that you purpose.”
Then to her the father of gods and men made answer:
545 “Hera, do not go on hoping that you will hear all my
thoughts, since these will be too hard for you, though you are my wife.
Any thought that it is right for you to listen to, no one
neither man nor any immortal shall hear it before you.
But anything that apart from the rest of the gods I wish to

550 plan, do not always question each detail nor probe me.”
Then the goddess the ox-eyed lady Hera answered:
“Majesty, son of Kronos, what sort of thing have you spoken?
Truly too much in time past I have not questioned nor probed you,
but you are entirely free to think out whatever pleases you.
555 Now, though, I am terribly afraid you were won over
by Thetis the silver-footed, the daughter of the sea’s ancient.
For early in the morning she sat beside you and took your
knees, and I think you bowed your head in assent to do honor
to Achilleus, and to destroy many beside the ships of the Achaians.”
560 Then in return Zeus who gathers the clouds made answer:
“Dear lady, I never escape you; you are always full of suspicion.
Yet thus you can accomplish nothing surely, but be more
distant from my heart than ever, and it will be the worse for you.
If what you say is true, then that is the way I wish it.
565 But go then, sit down in silence, and do as I tell you,
for fear all the gods, as many as are on Olympos, can do nothing
if I come close and lay my unconquerable hands upon you.”
He spoke, and the goddess the ox-eyed lady Hera was frightened
and went and sat down in silence wrenching her heart to obedience,
570 and all the Uranian gods in the house of Zeus were troubled.
Hephaistos the renowned smith rose up to speak among them,
to bring comfort to his beloved mother, Hera of the white arms:
“This will be a disastrous matter and not endurable
if you two are to quarrel thus for the sake of mortals
575 and bring brawling among the gods. There will be no pleasure
in the stately feast at all, since vile things will be uppermost.
And I entreat my mother, though she herself understands it,
to be ingratiating toward our father Zeus, that no longer
our father may scold her and break up the quiet of our feasting.
580 For if the Olympian who handles the lightning should be minded
to hurl us out of our places, he is far too strong for any.
Do you therefore approach him again with words made gentle,
and at once the Olympian will be gracious again to us.”
He spoke, and springing to his feet put a two-handled goblet

585 into his mother’s hands and spoke again to her once more:
“Have patience, my mother, and endure it, though you be saddened,
for fear that, dear as you are, I see you before my own eyes
struck down, and then sorry though I be I shall not be able
to do anything. It is too hard to fight against the Olympian.
590 There was a time once before now I was minded to help you,
and he caught me by the foot and threw me from the magic threshold,
and all day long I dropped helpless, and about sunset
I landed in Lemnos, and there was not much life left in me.
After that fall it was the Sintian men who took care of me.”
595 He spoke, and the goddess of the white arms Hera smiled at him,
and smiling she accepted the goblet out of her son’s hand.
Thereafter beginning from the left he poured drinks for the other
gods, dipping up from the mixing bowl the sweet nectar.
But among the blessed immortals uncontrollable laughter
600 went up as they saw Hephaistos bustling about the palace.
Thus thereafter the whole day long until the sun went under
they feasted, nor was anyone’s hunger denied a fair portion,
nor denied the beautifully wrought lyre in the hands of Apollo
nor the antiphonal sweet sound of the Muses singing.
605 Afterward when the light of the flaming sun went under
they went away each one to sleep in his home where
for each one the far-renowned strong-handed Hephaistos
had built a house by means of his craft smanship and cunning.
Zeus the Olympian and lord of the lightning went to
610 his own bed, where always he lay when sweet sleep came on him.
Going up to the bed he slept and Hera of the gold throne beside him.

BOOK TWO

5

10

15

20

25

Now the rest of the gods, and men who were lords of chariots,
slept night long, but the ease of sleep came not upon Zeus
who was pondering in his heart how he might bring honor
to Achilleus, and destroy many beside the ships of the Achaians.
Now to his mind this thing appeared to be the best counsel,
to send evil Dream to Atreus’ son Agamemnon.
He cried out to the dream and addressed him in winged words:
“Go forth, evil Dream, beside the swift ships of the Achaians.
Make your way to the shelter of Atreus’ son Agamemnon;
speak to him in words exactly as I command you.
Bid him arm the flowing-haired Achaians for battle
in all haste; since now he might take the wide-wayed city
of the Trojans. For no longer are the gods who live on Olympos
arguing the matter, since Hera forced them all over
by her supplication, and evils are in store for the Trojans.”
So he spoke, and Dream listened to his word and descended.
Lightly he came down beside the swift ships of the Achaians
and came to Agamemnon the son of Atreus. He found him
sleeping within his shelter in a cloud of immortal slumber.
Dream stood then beside his head in the likeness of Nestor,
Neleus’ son, whom Agamemnon honored beyond all
elders beside. In Nestor’s likeness the divine Dream spoke to him:
“Son of wise Atreus breaker of horses, are you sleeping?
He should not sleep night long who is a man burdened with counsels
and responsibility for a people and cares so numerous.
Listen quickly to what I say, since I am a messenger
of Zeus, who far away cares much for you and is pitiful.
Zeus bids you arm the flowing-haired Achaians for battle

30

35

40

45

50

55

60

in all haste; since now you might take the wide-wayed city
of the Trojans. For no longer are the gods who live on Olympos
arguing the matter, since Hera forced them all over
by her supplication, and evils are in store for the Trojans
from Zeus. Keep this thought in your heart then, let not forgetfulness
take you, after you are released from the kindly sweet slumber.”
So he spoke and went away, and left Agamemnon
there, believing things in his heart that were not to be accomplished.
For he thought that on that very day he would take Priam’s city;
fool, who knew nothing of all the things Zeus planned to accomplish,
Zeus, who yet was minded to visit tears and sufferings
on Trojans and Danaäns alike in the strong encounters.
Agamemnon awoke from sleep, the divine voice drifting
around him. He sat upright and put on his tunic,
beautiful, fresh woven, and threw the great mantle over it.
Underneath his shining feet he bound the fair sandals
and across his shoulders slung the sword with the nails of silver,
and took up the scepter of his fathers, immortal forever.
Thus he went beside the ships of the bronze-armored Achaians.
Now the goddess Dawn drew close to tall Olympos
with her message of light to Zeus and the other immortals.
But Agamemnon commanded his clear-voiced heralds to summon
by proclamation to assembly the flowing-haired Achaians,
and the heralds made their cry and the men were assembled swiftly.
First he held a council session of the high-hearted princes
beside the ship of Nestor, the king of the race of Pylos.
Summoning these he compacted before them his close counsel:
“Hear me, friends: in my sleep a Dream divine came to me
through the immortal night, and in appearance and stature
and figure it most closely resembled splendid Nestor.
It came and stood above my head and spoke a word to me:
‘Son of wise Atreus breaker of horses, are you sleeping?
He should not sleep night long who is a man burdened with counsels
and responsibility for a people and cares so numerous.
Now listen quickly to what I say, since I am a messenger
from Zeus, who far away cares much for you and is pitiful.

65 Zeus bids you arm the flowing-haired Achaians for battle
in all haste; since now you might take the wide-wayed city
of the Trojans. For no longer are the gods who live on Olympos
arguing the matter, since Hera has forced them all over
by her supplication, and evils are in store for the Trojans
70 by Zeus’ will. Keep this within your heart.’ So speaking
the Dream went away on wings, and sweet sleep released me.
Come then, let us see if we can arm the sons of the Achaians.
Yet first, since it is the right way, I will make trial of them
by words, and tell them even to flee in their benched vessels.
75 Do you take stations here and there, to check them with orders.”
He spoke thus, and sat down again, and among them rose up
Nestor, he who ruled as a king in sandy Pylos.
He in kind intention toward all stood forth and addressed them:
“Friends, who are leaders of the Argives and keep their counsel,
80 had it been any other Achaian who told of this dream
we should have called it a lie and we might rather have turned from it.
Now he who claims to be the best of the Achaians has seen it.
Come then, let us see if we can arm the sons of the Achaians.”
So he spoke and led the way departing from the council,
85 and the rest rose to their feet, the scattered kings, obeying
the shepherd of the people, and the army thronged behind them.
Like the swarms of clustering bees that issue forever
in fresh bursts from the hollow in the stone, and hang like
bunched grapes as they hover beneath the flowers in springtime
90 fluttering in swarms together this way and that way,
so the many nations of men from the ships and the shelters
along the front of the deep sea beach marched in order
by companies to the assembly, and Rumor walked blazing among them,
Zeus’ messenger, to hasten them along. Thus they were assembled
95 and the place of their assembly was shaken, and the earth groaned
as the people took their positions and there was tumult. Nine heralds
shouting set about putting them in order, to make them cease their
clamor and listen to the kings beloved of Zeus. The people
took their seats in sober fashion and were marshaled in their places

100 and gave over their clamoring. Powerful Agamemnon
stood up holding the scepter Hephaistos had wrought him carefully.
Hephaistos gave it to Zeus the king, the son of Kronos,
and Zeus in turn gave it to the courier Argeïphontes,
and lord Hermes gave it to Pelops, driver of horses,
105 and Pelops again gave it to Atreus, the shepherd of the people.
Atreus dying left it to Thyestes of the rich flocks,
and Thyestes left it in turn to Agamemnon to carry
and to be lord of many islands and over all Argos.
Leaning upon this scepter he spoke and addressed the Argives:
110 “Fighting men and friends, O Danaäns, henchmen of Ares:
Zeus son of Kronos has caught me fast in bitter futility.
He is hard; who before this time promised me and consented
that I might sack strong-walled Ilion and sail homeward.
Now he has devised a vile deception, and bids me go back
115 to Argos in dishonor having lost many of my people.
Such is the way it will be pleasing to Zeus, who is too strong,
who before now has broken the crests of many cities
and will break them again, since his power is beyond all others.
And this shall be a thing of shame for the men hereafter
120 to be told, that so strong, so great a host of Achaians
carried on and fought in vain a war that was useless
against men fewer than they, with no accomplishment shown for it;
since if both sides were to be willing, Achaians and Trojans,
to cut faithful oaths of truce, and both to be numbered,
125 and the Trojans were to be counted by those with homes in the city,
while we were to be allotted in tens, we Achaians,
and each one of our tens chose a man of Troy to pour wine for it,
still there would be many tens left without a wine steward.
By so much I claim we sons of the Achaians outnumber
130 the Trojans—those who live in the city; but there are companions
from other cities in their numbers, wielders of the spear, to help them,
who drive me hard back again and will not allow me,
despite my will, to sack the well-founded stronghold of Ilion.
And now nine years of mighty Zeus have gone by, and the timbers
135 of our ships have rotted away and the cables are broken

and far away our own wives and our young children
are sitting within our halls and wait for us, while still our work here
stays forever unfinished as it is, for whose sake we came hither.
Come then, do as I say, let us all be won over; let us
140 run away with our ships to the beloved land of our fathers
since no longer now shall we capture Troy of the wide ways.”
So he spoke, and stirred up the passion in the breast of all those
who were within that multitude and listened to his counsel.
And the assembly was shaken as on the sea the big waves
145 in the main by Ikaria, when the south and south-east winds
driving down from the clouds of Zeus the father whip them.
As when the west wind moves across the grain deep standing,
boisterously, and shakes and sweeps it till the tassels lean, so
all of that assembly was shaken, and the men in tumult
150 swept to the ships, and underneath their feet the dust lifted
and rose high, and the men were all shouting to one another
to lay hold on the ships and drag them down to the bright sea.
They cleaned out the keel channels and their cries hit skyward
as they made for home and snatched the props from under the vessels.

155

Then for the Argives a homecoming beyond fate might have
been accomplished, had not Hera spoken a word to Athene:
“For shame, now, Atrytone, daughter of Zeus of the aegis.
As things are, the Argives will take flight homeward over
the wide ridges of the sea to the land of their fathers,
160 and thus they would leave to Priam and to the Trojans Helen of Argos,
to glory over, for whose sake many Achaians
lost their lives in Troy far from their own native country.
But go now along the host of the bronze-armored Achaians.
Speak to each man in words of gentleness and draw him backward
165 nor let them drag down to the salt sea their oarswept vessels.”
So she spoke, nor did the goddess gray-eyed Athene
disobey her, but went in speed down the peaks of Olympos,

and lightly she arrived beside the fast ships of the Achaians.
There she came on Odysseus, the equal of Zeus in counsel,
170 standing still; he had laid no hand upon his black, strong-benched
vessel, since disappointment touched his heart and his spirit.
Athene of the gray eyes stood beside him and spoke to him:
“Son of Laërtes and seed of Zeus, resourceful Odysseus:
will it be this way? Will you all hurl yourselves into your benched ships
175 and take flight homeward to the beloved land of your fathers,
and would you thus leave to Priam and to the Trojans Helen
of Argos, to glory over, for whose sake many Achaians
lost their lives in Troy far from their own native country?
Go now along the host of the Achaians, give way no longer,
180 speak to each man in words of gentleness and draw them backward,
nor let them drag down to the salt sea their oarswept vessels.”
So she spoke, and he knew the voice of the goddess speaking
and went on the run, throwing aside his cloak, which was caught up
by Eurybates the herald of Ithaka who followed him.
185 He came face to face with Agamemnon, son of Atreus,
and took from him the scepter of his fathers, immortal forever.
With this he went beside the ships of the bronze-armored Achaians.
Whenever he encountered some king, or man of influence,
he would stand beside him and with soft words try to restrain him:
190 “Excellency! It does not become you to be frightened like any
coward. Rather hold fast and check the rest of the people.
You do not yet clearly understand the purpose of Atreides.
Now he makes trial, but soon will bear hard on the sons of the
Achaians.
Did we not all hear what he was saying in council?
195 May he not in anger do some harm to the sons of the Achaians!
For the anger of god-supported kings is a big matter,
to whom honor and love are given from Zeus of the counsels.”
When he saw some man of the people who was shouting,
he would strike at him with his staff, and reprove him also:
200 “Excellency! Sit still and listen to what others tell you,
to those who are better men than you, you skulker and coward

and thing of no account whatever in battle or council.
Surely not all of us Achaians can be as kings here.
Lordship for many is no good thing. Let there be one ruler,
205 one king, to whom the son of devious-devising Kronos
gives the scepter and right of judgment, to watch over his people.”
So he went through the army marshaling it, until once more
they swept back into the assembly place from the ships and the shelters
clamorously, as when from the thunderous sea the surf-beat
210 crashes upon the great beach, and the whole sea is in tumult.
Now the rest had sat down, and were orderly in their places,
but one man, Thersites of the endless speech, still scolded,
who knew within his head many words, but disorderly;
vain, and without decency, to quarrel
215 with the princes with any word he thought might be amusing to the
Argives.
This was the ugliest man who came beneath Ilion. He was
bandy-legged and went lame of one foot, with shoulders
stooped and drawn together over his chest, and above this
his skull went up to a point with the wool grown sparsely upon it.
220 Beyond all others Achilleus hated him, and Odysseus.
These two he was forever abusing, but now at brilliant
Agamemnon he clashed the shrill noise of his abuse. The Achaians
were furiously angry with him, their minds resentful.
But he, crying the words aloud, scolded Agamemnon:
225 “Son of Atreus, what thing further do you want, or find fault with
now? Your shelters are filled with bronze; there are plenty of the
choicest
women for you within your shelter, whom we Achaians
give to you first of all whenever we capture some stronghold.
Or is it still more gold you will be wanting, that some son
230 of the Trojans, breakers of horses, brings as ransom out of Ilion,
one that I, or some other Achaian, capture and bring in?
Is it some young woman to lie with in love and keep her
all to yourself apart from the others? It is not right for
you, their leader, to lead in sorrow the sons of the Achaians.

235 My good fools, poor abuses, you women, not men, of Achaia,
let us go back home in our ships, and leave this man here
by himself in Troy to mull his prizes of honor
that he may find out whether or not we others are helping him.
And now he has dishonored Achilleus, a man much better
240 than he is. He has taken his prize by force and keeps her.
But there is no gall in Achilleus’ heart, and he is forgiving.
Otherwise, son of Atreus, this were your last outrage.”
So he spoke, Thersites, abusing Agamemnon
the shepherd of the people. But brilliant Odysseus swiftly
245 came beside him scowling and laid a harsh word upon him:
“Fluent orator though you be, Thersites, your words are
ill-considered. Stop, nor stand up alone against princes.
Out of all those who came beneath Ilion with Atreides
I assert there is no worse man than you are. Therefore
250 you shall not lift up your mouth to argue with princes,
cast reproaches into their teeth, nor sustain the homegoing.
We do not even know clearly how these things will be accomplished,
whether we sons of the Achaians shall win home well or badly;
yet you sit here throwing abuse at Agamemnon,
255 Atreus’ son, the shepherd of the people, because the Danaän
fighters give him much. You argue nothing but scandal.
And this also will I tell you, and it will be a thing accomplished.
If once more I find you playing the fool, as you are now,
nevermore let the head of Odysseus sit on his shoulders,
260 let me nevermore be called Telemachos’ father,
if I do not take you and strip away your personal clothing,
your mantle and your tunic that cover over your nakedness,
and send you thus bare and howling back to the fast ships,
whipping you out of the assembly place with the strokes of indignity.”
265 So he spoke and dashed the scepter against his back and
shoulders, and he doubled over, and a round tear dropped from him,
and a bloody welt stood up between his shoulders under
the golden scepter’s stroke, and he sat down again, frightened,
in pain, and looking helplessly about wiped off the tear-drops.
270 Sorry though the men were they laughed over him happily,

and thus they would speak to each other, each looking at the man next
him:
“Come now: Odysseus has done excellent things by thousands,
bringing forward good counsels and ordering armed encounters;
but now this is far the best thing he ever has accomplished
275 among the Argives, to keep this thrower of words, this braggart
out of assembly. Never again will his proud heart stir him
up, to wrangle with the princes in words of revilement.”
So the multitude spoke, but Odysseus, sacker of cities,
stood up holding the staff, and beside him gray-eyed Athene
280 in the likeness of a herald enjoined the people to silence,
that at once the foremost and the utmost sons of the Achaians
might listen to him speaking and deliberate his counsel.
He in kind intention toward all stood forth and addressed them:
“Son of Atreus: now, my lord, the Achaians are trying
285 to make you into a thing of reproach in the sight of all mortal
men, and not fulfilling the promise they undertook once
as they set forth to come here from horse-pasturing Argos,
to go home only after you had sacked strong-walled Ilion.
For as if they were young children or widowed women
290 they cry out and complain to each other about going homeward.
In truth, it is a hard thing, to be grieved with desire for going.
Any man who stays away one month from his own wife
with his intricate ship is impatient, one whom the storm winds
of winter and the sea rising keep back. And for us now
295 this is the ninth of the circling years that we wait here. Therefore
I cannot find fault with the Achaians for their impatience
beside the curved ships; yet always it is disgraceful
to wait long and at the end go home empty-handed.
No, but be patient, friends, and stay yet a little longer
300 until we know whether Kalchas’ prophecy is true or is not true.
For I remember this thing well in my heart, and you all are
witnesses, whom the spirits of death have not carried away from us;
yesterday and before, at Aulis, when the ships of the Achaians
were gathered bringing disaster to the Trojans and Priam,

305 and we beside a spring and upon the sacred altars
were accomplishing complete hecatombs to the immortals
under a fair plane tree whence ran the shining of water.
There appeared a great sign; a snake, his back blood-mottled,
a thing of horror, cast into the light by the very Olympian,
310 wound its way from under the altar and made toward the plane tree.
Thereupon were innocent children, the young of the sparrow,
cowering underneath the leaves at the uttermost branch tip,
eight of them, and the mother was the ninth, who bore these children.
The snake ate them all after their pitiful screaming,
315 and the mother, crying aloud for her young ones, fluttered about him,
and as she shrilled he caught her by the wing and coiled around her.
After he had eaten the sparrow herself with her children
the god who had shown the snake forth made him a monument,
striking him stone, the son of devious-devising Kronos,
320 and we standing about marveled at the thing that had been done.
So as the terror and the god’s monsters came into the hecatomb
Kalchas straightway spoke before us interpreting the gods’ will:
‘Why are you turned voiceless, you flowing-haired Achaians?
Zeus of the counsels has shown us this great portent: a thing late,
325 late to be accomplished, whose glory shall perish never.
As this snake has eaten the sparrow herself with her children,
eight of them, and the mother was the ninth, who bore them,
so for years as many as this shall we fight in this place
and in the tenth year we shall take the city of the wide ways.’
330 So he spoke to us then; now all this is being accomplished.
Come then, you strong-greaved Achaians, let every man stay
here, until we have taken the great citadel of Priam.”
So he spoke, and the Argives shouted aloud, and about them
the ships echoed terribly to the roaring Achaians
335 as they cried out applause to the word of godlike Odysseus.
Now among them spoke the Gerenian horseman, Nestor:
“Oh, for shame! You are like children when you hold assembly,
infant children, to whom the works of war mean nothing.
Where then shall our covenants go, and the oaths we have taken?

340 Let counsels and the meditations of men be given to the flames then,
with the unmixed wine poured and the right hands we trusted.
We do our fighting with words only, and can discover
no remedy, though we have stayed here a long time. Son of Atreus,
do you still as before hold fast to your counsel unshaken
345 and be the leader of the Argives through the strong encounters;
let them go perish, these one or two, who think apart from
the rest of the Achaians, since there will be no use in them
until they get back again to Argos without ever learning
whether Zeus of the aegis promises false or truly.
350 For I say to you, the son of all-powerful Kronos
promised, on that day when we went in our fast-running vessels,
we of Argos, carrying blood and death to the Trojans.
He flashed lightning on our right, showing signs of favor.
Therefore let no man be urgent to take the way homeward
355 until after he has lain in bed with the wife of a Trojan
to avenge Helen’s longing to escape and her lamentations.
But if any man is terribly desirous to go home,
let him only lay his hands on his well-benched black ship,
that before all others he may win death and destruction.
360 Come, my lord: yourself be careful, and listen to another.
This shall not be a word to be cast away that I tell you.
Set your men in order by tribes, by clans, Agamemnon,
and let clan go in support of clan, let tribe support tribe.
If you do it this way, and the Achaians obey you,
365 you will see which of your leaders is bad, and which of your people,
and which also is brave, since they will fight in divisions,
and might learn also whether by magic you fail to take this
city, or by men’s cowardice and ignorance of warfare.”
Then in answer again spoke powerful Agamemnon:
370 “Once again, old sir, you surpass the sons of the Achaians
in debate. O father Zeus, Athene, Apollo:
would that among the Achaians I had ten such counselors.
Then perhaps the city of lord Priam would be bent
underneath our hands, captured and sacked. But instead
375 Zeus of the aegis, son of Kronos, has given me bitterness,

who drives me into unprofitable abuse and quarrels.
For I and Achilleus fought together for a girl’s sake
in words’ violent encounter, and I was the first to be angry.
If ever we can take one single counsel, then no longer
380 shall the Trojans’ evil be put aside, not even for a small time.
Now go back, take your dinner, and let us gather our warcraft.
Let a man put a good edge to his spear, and his shield in order,
let each put good fodder before his swift-footed horses,
and each man look well over his chariot, careful of his fighting,
385 that all day long we may be in the division of hateful Ares.
There will not even for a small time be any respite
unless darkness come down to separate the strength of the fighters.
There will be a man’s sweat on the shield-strap binding the breast to
the shield hiding the man’s shape, and the hand on the spear grow
weary.
390 There will be sweat on a man’s horse straining at the smoothed chariot.
But any man whom I find trying, apart from the battle,
to hang back by the curved ships, for him no longer
will there be any means to escape the dogs and the vultures.”
So he spoke, and the Argives shouted aloud, as surf crashing
395 against a sheer ness, driven by the south wind descending,
some cliff out-jutting, left never alone by the waves from
all the winds that blow, as they rise one place and another.
They stood up scattering and made for the ships; they kindled
the fires’ smoke along the shelters, and took their dinner,
400 each man making a sacrifice to some one of the immortal
gods, in prayer to escape death and the grind of Ares.
But Agamemnon the lord of men dedicated a fat ox
five years old to Zeus, all-powerful son of Kronos,
and summoned the nobles and the great men of all the Achaians,
405 Nestor before all others, and next the lord Idomeneus,
next the two Aiantes and Tydeus’ son Diomedes,
and sixth Odysseus, a man like Zeus himself for counsel.
Of his own accord came Menelaos of the great war cry
who knew well in his own mind the cares of his brother.
410 They stood in a circle about the ox and took up the scattering

barley; and among them powerful Agamemnon spoke in prayer:
“Zeus, exalted and mightiest, sky-dwelling in the dark mist:
let not the sun go down and disappear into darkness
until I have hurled headlong the castle of Priam
415 blazing, and lit the castle gates with the flames’ destruction;
not till I have broken at the chest the tunic of Hektor
torn with the bronze blade, and let many companions about him
go down headlong into the dust, teeth gripping the ground soil.”
He spoke, but none of this would the son of Kronos accomplish,
420 who accepted the victims, but piled up the unwished-for hardship.
Now when all had made prayer and flung down the scattering barley,
first they drew back the victim’s head, cut his throat and skinned him,
and cut away the meat from the thighs and wrapped them in fat,
making a double fold, and laid shreds of flesh above them.
425 Placing these on sticks cleft and peeled they burned them,
and spitted the vitals and held them over the flame of Hephaistos.
But when they had burned the thigh pieces and tasted the vitals
they cut all the remainder into pieces and spitted them
and roasted all carefully and took off the pieces.
430 Then after they had finished the work and got the feast ready
they feasted, nor was any man’s hunger denied a fair portion.
But when they had put away their desire for eating and drinking
the Gerenian horseman Nestor began speaking among them:
“Son of Atreus, most lordly and king of men, Agamemnon,
435 let us talk no more of these things, nor for a long time
set aside the action which the god puts into our hands now.
Come then, let the heralds of the bronze-armored Achaians
make proclamation to the people and assemble them by the vessels,
and let us together as we are go down the wide host
440 of the Achaians, to stir more quickly the fierce war god.”
He spoke, nor did the lord of men Agamemnon neglect him,
but straightway commanded the clear-voiced heralds to summon
by proclamation to battle the flowing-haired Achaians;
and the heralds made their cry and the men were assembled swiftly.
445 And they, the god-supported kings, about Agamemnon

ran marshaling the men, and among them gray-eyed Athene
holding the dear treasured aegis, ageless, immortal,
from whose edges float a hundred all-golden tassels,
each one carefully woven, and each worth a hundred oxen.
450 With this fluttering she swept through the host of the Achaians
urging them to go forward. She kindled the strength in each man’s
heart to take the battle without respite and keep on fighting.
And now battle became sweeter to them than to go back
in their hollow ships to the beloved land of their fathers.
455 As obliterating fire lights up a vast forest
along the crests of a mountain, and the flare shows far off,
so as they marched, from the magnificent bronze the gleam went
dazzling all about through the upper air to the heaven.
These, as the multitudinous nations of birds winged,
460 of geese, and of cranes, and of swans long-throated
in the Asian meadow beside the Kaÿstrian waters
this way and that way make their flights in the pride of their wings,
then
settle in clashing swarms and the whole meadow echoes with them,
so of these the multitudinous tribes from the ships and
465 shelters poured to the plain of Skamandros, and the earth beneath their
feet and under the feet of their horses thundered horribly.
They took position in the blossoming meadow of Skamandros,
thousands of them, as leaves and flowers appear in their season.
Like the multitudinous nations of swarming insects
470 who drive hither and thither about the stalls of the sheepfold
in the season of spring when the milk splashes in the milk pails:
in such numbers the flowing-haired Achaians stood up
through the plain against the Trojans, hearts burning to break them.
These, as men who are goatherds among the wide goatflocks
475 easily separate them in order as they take to the pasture,
thus the leaders separated them this way and that way
toward the encounter, and among them powerful Agamemnon,
with eyes and head like Zeus who delights in thunder,
like Ares for girth, and with the chest of Poseidon;
480 like some ox of the herd pre-eminent among the others,

a bull, who stands conspicuous in the huddling cattle;
such was the son of Atreus as Zeus made him that day,
conspicuous among men, and foremost among the fighters.
Tell me now, you Muses who have your homes on Olympos.
485 For you, who are goddesses, are there, and you know all things,
and we have heard only the rumor of it and know nothing.
Who then of those were the chief men and the lords of the Danaäns?
I could not tell over the multitude of them nor name them,
not if I had ten tongues and ten mouths, not if I had
490 a voice never to be broken and a heart of bronze within me,
not unless the Muses of Olympia, daughters
of Zeus of the aegis, remembered all those who came beneath Ilion.
I will tell the lords of the ships, and the ships numbers.
Leïtos and Peneleos were leaders of the Boiotians,
495 with Arkesilaos and Prothoënor and Klonios;
they who lived in Hyria and in rocky Aulis,
in the hill-bends of Eteonos, and Schoinos, and Skolos,
Thespeia and Graia, and in spacious Mykalessos;
they who dwelt about Harma and Eilesion and Erythrai,
500 they who held Eleon and Hyle and Peteon,
with Okalea and Medeon, the strong-founded citadel,
Kopai, and Eutresis, and Thisbe of the dove-cotes;
they who held Koroneia, and the meadows of Haliartos,
they who held Plataia, and they who dwelt about Glisa,
505 they who held the lower Thebes, the strong-founded citadel,
and Onchestos the sacred, the shining grove of Poseidon;
they who held Arne of the great vineyards, and Mideia,
with Nisa the sacrosanct and uttermost Anthedon.
Of these there were fifty ships in all, and on board
510 each of these a hundred and twenty sons of the Boiotians.
But they who lived in Aspledon and Orchomenos of the Minyai,
Askalaphos led these, and Ialmenos, children of Ares,
whom Astyochē bore to him in the house of Aktor

Azeus’ son, a modest maiden; she went into the chamber
515 with strong Ares, who was laid in bed with her secretly.
With these two there were marshaled thirty hollow vessels.
Schedios and Epistrophos led the men of Phokis,
children of Iphitos, who was son of great-hearted Naubolos.
These held Kyparissos, and rocky Pytho, and Krisa
520 the sacrosanct together with Daulis and Panopeus;
they who lived about Hyampolis and Anamoreia,
they who dwelt about Kephisos, the river immortal,
they who held Lilaia beside the well springs of Kephisos.
Following along with these were forty black ships,
525 and the leaders marshaling the ranks of the Phokians set them
in arms on the left wing of the host beside the Boiotians.
Swift Aias son of Oïleus led the men of Lokris,
the lesser Aias, not great in size like the son of Telamon,
but far slighter. He was a small man armored in linen,
530 yet with the throwing spear surpassed all Achaians and Hellenes.
These were the dwellers in Kynos and Opoeis and Kalliaros,
and in Bessa, and Skarphe, and lovely Augeiai,
in Thronion and Tarphe and beside the waters of Boagrios.
Following along with him were forty black ships
535 of the Lokrians, who dwell across from sacred Euboia.
They who held Euboia, the Abantes, whose wind was fury,
Chalkis, and Eretria, the great vineyards of Histiaia,
and seaborne Kerinthos and the steep stronghold of Dion,
they who held Karystos and they who dwelt about Styra,
540 of these the leader was Elephenor, scion of Ares,
son of Chalkodon and lord of the great-hearted Abantes.
And the running Abantes followed with him, their hair grown
long at the back, spearmen furious with the out-reached ash spear
to rip the corselets girt about the chests of their enemies.
545 Following along with him were forty black ships.
But the men who held Athens, the strong-founded citadel,
the deme of great-hearted Erechtheus, whom once Athene

Zeus’ daughter tended after the grain-giving fields had borne him,
and established him to be in Athens in her own rich temple;
550 there as the circling years go by the sons of the Athenians
make propitiation with rams and bulls sacrificed;
of these men the leader was Peteos’ son Menestheus.
Never on earth before had there been a man born like him
for the arrangement in order of horses and shielded fighters.
555 Nestor alone could challenge him, since he was far older.
Following along with him were fifty black ships.
Out of Salamis Aias brought twelve ships and placed them
next to where the Athenian battalions were drawn up.
They who held Argos and Tiryns of the huge walls,
560 Hermionē and Asinē lying down the deep gulf,
Troizen and Eïonai, and Epidauros of the vineyards,
they who held Aigina and Mases, sons of the Achaians,
of these the leader was Diomedes of the great war cry
with Sthenelos, own son to the high-renowned Kapaneus,
565 and with them as a third went Euryalos, a man godlike,
son of Mekisteus the king, and scion of Talaos;
but the leader of all was Diomedes of the great war cry.
Following along with these were eighty black ships.
But the men who held Mykenai, the strong-founded citadel,
570 Korinth the luxurious, and strong-founded Kleonai;
they who dwelt in Orneai and lovely Araithyrea,
and Sikyon, where of old Adrestos had held the kingship;
they who held Hyperesia and steep Gonoëssa,
they who held Pellene and they who dwelt about Aigion,
575 all about the seashore and about the wide headland of Helikē,
of their hundred ships the leader was powerful Agamemnon,
Atreus’ son, with whom followed far the best and bravest
people; and among them he himself stood armored in shining
bronze, glorying, conspicuous among the great fighters,
580 since he was greatest among them all, and led the most people.
They who held the swarming hollow of Lakedaimon,

Pharis, and Sparta, and Messe of the dove-cotes,
they who dwelt in Bryseiai and lovely Augeiai,
they who held Amyklai and the seaward city of Helos,
585 they who held Laas, and they who dwelt about Oitylos,
of these his brother Menelaos of the great war cry
was leader, with sixty ships marshaled apart from the others.
He himself went among them in the confidence of his valor,
driving them battleward, since above all his heart was eager
590 to avenge Helen’s longing to escape and her lamentations.
They who dwelt about Pylos and lovely Arene,
and Thryon, the Alpheios crossing, and strong-built Aipy;
they who lived in Kyparisseeis and Amphigeneia,
Pteleos and Helos and Dorion, where the Muses
595 encountering Thamyris the Thracian stopped him from singing
as he came from Oichalia and Oichalian Eurytos;
for he boasted that he would prevail, if the very Muses,
daughters of Zeus who holds the aegis, were singing against him,
and these in their anger struck him maimed, and the voice of wonder
600 they took away, and made him a singer without memory;
of these the leader was the Gerenian horseman, Nestor,
in whose command were marshaled ninety hollow vessels.
They who held Arkadia under the sheer peak, Kyllene,
beside the tomb of Aipytos, where men fight at close quarters,
605 they who dwelt in Orchomenos of the flocks, and Pheneos,
about Rhipe and Stratia and windy Enispe;
they who held Tegea and Mantineia the lovely,
they who held Stymphalos, and dwelt about Parrhasia,
their leader was Angkaios’ son, powerful Agapenor.
610 Sixty was the number of their ships, and in each ship
went many men of Arkadia, well skilled in battle.
Agamemnon the lord of men himself had given
these for the crossing of the wine-blue sea their strong-benched vessels,
Atreus’ son, since the work of the sea was nothing to these men.
615 They who lived in Bouprasion and brilliant Elis,
all as much as Hyrmine and Myrsinos the uttermost

and the Olenian rock and Alesion close between them,
of these there were four chieftains, and with each man ten swift
vessels followed, with many Epeian men on board them.
620 Of two tens Thalpios and Amphimachos were leaders,
of Aktor’s seed, sons one of Kteatos, one of Eurytos.
Ten more were led by Amaryngkeus’ son, strong Diores,
and of the fourth ten godlike Polyxeinos was leader,
son of lord Agasthenes, of the race of Augeias.

625

They who came from Doulichion and the sacred Echinai,
islands, where men live across the water from Elis,
Meges was the leader of these, a man like Ares,
Phyleus’ son, whom the rider dear to Zeus had begotten,
Phyleus, who angered with his father had settled Doulichion.
630 Following along with him were forty black ships.
But Odysseus led the high-hearted men of Kephallenia,
those who held Ithaka and leaf-trembling Neriton,
those who dwelt about Krokyleia and rigged Aigilips,
those who held Zakynthos and those who dwelt about Samos,
635 those who held the mainland and the places next to the crossing.
All these men were led by Odysseus, like Zeus in counsel.
Following with him were twelve ships with bows red painted.
Thoas son of Andraimon was leader of the Aitolians,
those who dwelt in Pleuron and Olenos and Pylene,
640 Kalydon of the rocks and Chalkis beside the seashore,
since no longer were the sons of high-hearted Oineus living,
nor Oineus himself, and fair-haired Meleagros had perished.
So all the lordship of the Aitolians was given to Thoas.
Following along with him were forty black ships.
645 Idomeneus the spear-famed was leader of the Kretans,
those who held Knosos and Gortyna of the great walls,
Lyktos and Miletos and silver-shining Lykastos,

and Phaistos and Rhytion, all towns well established,
and others who dwelt beside them in Krete of the hundred cities.
650 Of all these Idomeneus the spear-famed was leader,
with Meriones, a match for the murderous Lord of Battles.
Following along with these were eighty black ships.
Herakles’ son Tlepolemos the huge and mighty
led from Rhodes nine ships with the proud men of Rhodes aboard
them,
655 those who dwelt about Rhodes and were ordered in triple division,
Ialysos and Lindos and silver-shining Kameiros.
Of all these Tlepolemos the spear-famed was leader,
he whom Astyocheia bore to the strength of Herakles.
Herakles brought her from Ephyra and the river Selleëis
660 after he sacked many cities of strong, god-supported fighters.
Now when Tlepolemos was grown in the strong-built mansion,
he struck to death his own father’s beloved uncle,
Likymnios, scion of Ares, a man already ageing.
At once he put ships together and assembled a host of people
665 and went fugitive over the sea, since the others threatened,
the rest of the sons and the grandsons of the strength of Herakles.
And he came to Rhodes a wanderer, a man of misfortune,
and they settled there in triple division by tribes, beloved
of Zeus himself, who is lord over all gods and all men,
670 Kronos’ son, who showered the wonder of wealth upon them.
Nireus from Syme led three balanced vessels,
Nireus son of Aglaia and the king Charopos,
Nireus, the most beautiful man who came beneath Ilion
beyond the rest of the Danaäns next after perfect Achilleus.
675 But he was a man of poor strength and few people with him.
They who held Nisyros and Krapathos and Kasos,
and Kos, Eurypylos’ city, and the islands called Kalydnai,
of these again Pheidippos and Antiphos were the leaders,
sons both of Thessalos who was born to the lord Herakles.
680 In their command were marshaled thirty hollow vessels.

Now all those who dwelt about Pelasgian Argos,
those who lived by Alos and Alope and at Trachis,
those who held Phthia and Hellas the land of fair women,
who were called Myrmidons and Hellenes and Achaians,
685 of all these and their fifty ships the lord was Achilleus.
But these took no thought now for the grim clamor of battle
since there was no one who could guide them into close order,
since he, swift-footed brilliant Achilleus, lay where the ships were,
angered over the girl of the lovely hair, Briseis,
690 whom after much hard work he had taken away from Lyrnessos
after he had sacked Lyrnessos and the walls of Thebe
and struck down Epistrophos and Mynes the furious spearmen,
children of Euenos, king, and son of Selepios.
For her sake he lay grieving now, but was soon to rise up.

695

They who held Phylakē and Pyrasos of the flowers,
the precinct of Demeter, and Iton, mother of sheepflocks,
Antron by the seashore, and Pteleos deep in the meadows,
of these in turn fighting Protesilaos was leader
while he lived; but now the black earth had closed him under,
700 whose wife, cheeks torn for grief, was left behind in Phylakē
and a marriage half completed; a Dardanian man had killed him
as he leapt from his ship, far the first of all the Achaians.
Yet these, longing as they did for their leader, did not go leaderless,
but Podarkes, scion of Ares, set them in order,
705 child of Iphikles, who in turn was son to Phylakos
rich in flocks, full brother of high-hearted Protesilaos,
younger born; but the elder man was braver also,
Protesilaos, a man of battle; yet still the people
lacked not a leader, though they longed for him and his valor.
710 Following along with Podarkes were forty black ships.
They who lived by Pherai beside the lake Boibeis,
by Boibe and Glaphyrai and strong-founded Iolkos,

of their eleven ships the dear son of Admetos was leader,
Eumelos, born to Admetos by the beauty among women
715 Alkestis, loveliest of all the daughters of Pelias.
They who lived about Thaumakia and Methone,
they who held Meliboia and rugged Olizon,
of their seven ships the leader was Philoktetes
skilled in the bow’s work, and aboard each vessel were fifty
720 oarsmen, each well skilled in the strength of the bow in battle.
Yet he himself lay apart in the island, suffering strong pains,
in Lemnos the sacrosanct, where the sons of the Achaians had left him
in agony from the sore bite of the wicked water snake.
There he lay apart in his pain; yet soon the Argives
725 beside their ships were to remember lord Philoktetes.
Yet these, longing as they did for their leader, did not go leaderless,
but Medon, the bastard son of Oïleus, set them in order,
whom Rhene bore to Oïleus the sacker of cities.
They who held Trikke and the terraced place of Ithome,
730 and Oichalia, the city of Oichalian Eurytos,
of these in turn the leaders were two sons of Asklepios,
good healers both themselves, Podaleirios and Machaon.
In their command were marshaled thirty hollow vessels.
They who held Ormenios and the spring Hypereia,
735 they who held Asterion and the pale peaks of Titanos,
Eurypylos led these, the shining son of Euaimon.
Following along with him were forty black ships.
They who held Argissa and dwelt about Gyrtone,
Orthe and Elone and the white city Oloösson,
740 of these the leader was Polypoites, stubborn in battle,
son of Peirithoös whose father was Zeus immortal,
he whom glorious Hippodameia bore to Peirithoös
on that day when he wreaked vengeance on the hairy beast men
and drove them from Pelion and hurled them against the Aithikes;
745 not by himself, for Leonteus was with him, scion of Ares,
Leonteus, son of high-hearted Koronos the son of Kaineus.
Following in the guidance of these were forty black ships.

Gouneus from Kyphos led two and twenty vessels,
and the Enienes and the Perrhaibians stubborn in battle
750 followed him, they who made their homes by wintry Dodona,
and they who by lovely Titaressos held the tilled acres,
Titaressos, who into Peneios casts his bright current:
yet he is not mixed with the silver whirls of Peneios,
but like oil is floated along the surface above him:
755 since he is broken from the water of Styx, the fearful oath-river.
Prothoös son of Tenthredon was leader of the Magnesians,
those who dwelt about Peneios and leaf-trembling
Pelion. Of these Prothoös the swift-footed was leader.
Following along with him were forty black ships.

760 These then were the leaders and the princes among the Danaäns.
Tell me then, Muse, who of them all was the best and bravest
of the men, and the men’s horses, who went with the sons of Atreus.
Best by far among the horses were the mares of Eumelos
Pheres’ son, that he drove, swift-moving like birds, alike in
765 texture of coat, in age, both backs drawn level like a plumb-line.
These Apollo of the silver bow had bred in Pereia,
mares alike, who went with the terror of the god of battle.
Among the men far the best was Telamonian Aias
while Achilleus stayed angry, since he was far best of all of them,
770 and the horses also, who carried the blameless son of Peleus.
But Achilleus lay apart among his curved sea-wandering
vessels, raging at Agamemnon, the shepherd of the people,
Atreus’ son; and his men beside the break of the sea-beach
amused themselves with discs and with light spears for throwing
775 and bows; and the horses, standing each beside his chariot,
champed their clover and the parsley that grows in wet places,
resting, while the chariots of their lords stood covered
in the shelters, and the men forlorn of their warlike leader
wandered here and there in the camp, and did no fighting.

780

But the rest went forward, as if all the earth with flame were eaten,
and the ground echoed under them, as if Zeus who delights in thunder
were angry, as when he batters the earth about Typhoeus,
in the land of the Arimoi, where they say Typhoeus lies prostrate.
Thus beneath their feet the ground re-echoed loudly
785 to men marching, who made their way through the plain in great
speed.
Now to the Trojans came as messenger wind-footed Iris,
in her speed, with the dark message from Zeus of the aegis.
These were holding assembly in front of the doors of Priam
gathered together in one place, the elders and the young men.
790 Standing close at hand swift-running Iris spoke to them,
and likened her voice to that of the son of Priam, Polites,
who confident in the speed of his feet kept watch for the Trojans
aloft the ancient burial mound of ancient Aisyetes,
waiting for the time when the Achaians should move from their vessels.
795 In this man’s likeness Iris the swift-running spoke to them:
“Old sir, dear to you forever are words beyond number
as once, when there was peace; but stintless war has arisen.
In my time I have gone into many battles among men,
yet never have I seen a host like this, not one so numerous.
800 These look terribly like leaves, or the sands of the seashore,
as they advance across the plain to fight by the city.
Hektor, on you beyond all I urge this, to do as I tell you:
all about the great city of Priam are many companions,
but multitudinous is the speech of the scattered nations:
805 let each man who is their leader give orders to these men,
and let each set his citizens in order, and lead them.”
She spoke, nor did Hektor fail to mark the word of the goddess.
Instantly he broke up the assembly; they ran to their weapons.
All the gates were opened and the people swept through them
810 on foot, and with horses, and a clamor of shouting rose up.

Near the city but apart from it there is a steep hill
in the plain by itself, so you pass one side or the other.
This men call the Hill of the Thicket, but the immortal
gods have named it the burial mound of dancing Myrina.
815 There the Trojans and their companions were marshaled in order.
Tall Hektor of the shining helm was leader of the Trojans,
Priam’s son; and with him far the best and the bravest
fighting men were armed and eager to fight with the spear’s edge.
The strong son of Anchises was leader of the Dardanians,
820 Aineias, whom divine Aphrodite bore to Anchises
in the folds of Ida, a goddess lying in love with a mortal:
not Aineias alone, but with him were two sons of Antenor,
Archelochos and Akamas, both skilled in all fighting.
They who lived in Zeleia below the foot of Mount Ida,
825 men of wealth, who drank the dark water of Aisepos,
Trojans: of these the leader was the shining son of Lykaon,
Pandaros, with the bow that was actual gift of Apollo.
They who held Adresteia and the countryside of Apaisos,
they who held Pityeia and the sheer hill of Tereia,
830 these were led by Adrestos and Amphios armored in linen,
sons both of Merops of Perkote, who beyond all men
knew the art of prophecy, and tried to prevent his two sons
from going into the battle where men die. Yet these would not
listen, for the spirits of dark death were driving them onward.

835

They who dwelt in the places about Perkote and Praktion,
who held Sestos and Abydos and brilliant Arisbe,
their leader was Asios, Hyrtakos’ son, a prince of the people,
Asios, son of Hyrtakos, whom huge and shining
horses carried from Arisbe and the river Selleëis.
840 Hippothoös led the tribes of spear-fighting Pelasgians,
they who dwelt where the soil is rich about Larissa;
Hippothoös and Pylaios, scion of Ares, led these,
sons alike of Pelasgian Lethos, son of Teutamos.

Akamas led the men of Thrace with the fighter Peiroös,
845 all the Thracians held within the hard stream of the Hellespont.
Euphemos was leader of the Kikonian spearmen,
son of Troizenos, Keas’ son, the king whom the gods loved.
Pyraichmes in turn led the Paionians with their curved bows,
from Amydon far away and the broad stream of Axios,
850 Axios, whose stream on all earth is the loveliest water.
Pylaimones the wild heart was leader of the Paphlagonēs,
from the land of the Enetoi where the wild mules are engendered,
those who held Kytoros and those who dwelt about Sesamos,
those whose renowned homes were about Parthenios river,
855 and Kromna and Aigialos and high Erythinoi.
Odios and Epistrophos led the Halizones
from Alybē far away, where silver was first begotten.
Chromis, with Ennomos the augur, was lord of the Mysians;
yet his reading of birds could not keep off dark destruction
860 but he went down under the hands of swift-running Aiakides
in the river, as he slew other Trojans beside him.
Phorkys and godlike Askanios were lords of the Phrygians
from Askania far away, eager to fight in the onfall.
Mesthles and Antiphos were leaders of the Maionians,
865 sons of Talaimenes, who was born of the lake Gygaian:
these led the Maionian men whose home was beneath Mount Tmolos.
The Karians of the outland speech were led by Nastes,
they who held Miletos and the leaf-deep mountain of Phthiron,
the waters of Maiandros and the headlong peaks of Mykalē;
870 of these the two leaders were Amphimachos and Nastes,
Nastes and Amphimachos, the shining sons of Nomion.
Nastes came like a girl to the fighting in golden raiment,
poor fool, nor did this avail to keep dismal death back;
but he went down under the hands of swift-running Aiakides
875 in the river, and fiery Achilleus stripped the gold from him.
Sarpedon with unfaulted Glaukos was lord of the Lykians
from Lykia far away, and the whirling waters of Xanthos.

BOOK THREE

Now when the men of both sides were set in order by their leaders,
the Trojans came on with clamor and shouting, like wildfowl,
as when the clamor of cranes goes high to the heavens,
when the cranes escape the winter time and the rains unceasing
5 and clamorously wing their way to the streaming Ocean,
bringing to the Pygmaian men bloodshed and destruction:
at daybreak they bring on the baleful battle against them.
But the Achaian men went silently, breathing valor,
stubbornly minded each in his heart to stand by the others.
10 As on the peaks of a mountain the south wind scatters the thick mist,
no friend to the shepherd, but better than night for the robber,
and a man can see before him only so far as a stone cast,
so beneath their feet the dust drove up in a stormcloud
of men marching, who made their way through the plain in great speed.

15

Now as these in their advance had come close together,
Alexandros the godlike leapt from the ranks of the Trojans,
as challenger wearing across his shoulders the hide of a leopard,
curved bow and sword; while in his hands shaking two javelins
pointed with bronze, he challenged all the best of the Argives
20 to fight man to man against him in bitter combat.
Now as soon as Menelaos the warlike caught sight of him
making his way with long strides out in front of the army,
he was glad, like a lion who comes on a mighty carcass,
in his hunger chancing upon the body of a horned stag
25 or wild goat; who eats it eagerly, although against him

30

35

40

45

50

55

60

are hastening the hounds in their speed and the stalwart young men:
thus Menelaos was happy finding godlike Alexandros
there in front of his eyes, and thinking to punish the robber,
straightway in all his armor he sprang to the ground from his chariot.
But Alexandros the godlike when he saw Menelaos
showing among the champions, the heart was shaken within him;
to avoid death he shrank into the host of his own companions.
As a man who has come on a snake in the mountain valley
suddenly steps back, and the shivers come over his body,
and he draws back and away, cheeks seized with a green pallor;
so in terror of Atreus’ son godlike Alexandros
lost himself again in the host of the haughty Trojans.
But Hektor saw him and in words of shame rebuked him:
“Evil Paris, beautiful, woman-crazy, cajoling,
better had you never been born, or killed unwedded.
Truly I could have wished it so; it would be far better
than to have you with us to our shame, for others to sneer at.
Surely now the flowing-haired Achaians laugh at us,
thinking you are our bravest champion, only because your
looks are handsome, but there is no strength in your heart, no courage.
Were you like this that time when in sea-wandering vessels
assembling oarsmen to help you you sailed over the water,
and mixed with the outlanders, and carried away a fair woman
from a remote land, whose lord’s kin were spearmen and fighters,
to your father a big sorrow, and your city, and all your people,
to yourself a thing shameful but bringing joy to the enemy?
And now you would not stand up against warlike Menelaos?
Thus you would learn of the man whose blossoming wife you have
taken.
The lyre would not help you then, nor the favors of Aphrodite,
nor your locks, when you rolled in the dust, nor all your beauty.
No, but the Trojans are cowards in truth, else long before this
you had worn a mantle of flying stones for the wrong you did us.”
Then in answer Alexandros the godlike spoke to him:
“Hektor, seeing you have scolded me rightly, not beyond measure—
still, your heart forever is weariless, like an axe-blade

65

70

75

80

85

90

driven by a man’s strength through the timber, one who, well skilled,
hews a piece for a ship, driven on by the force of a man’s strength:
such is the heart in your breast, unshakable: yet do not
bring up against me the sweet favors of golden Aphrodite.
Never to be cast away are the gifts of the gods, magnificent,
which they give of their own will; no man could have them for wanting
them.
Now though, if you wish me to fight it out and do battle,
make the rest of the Trojans sit down, and all the Achaians,
and set me in the middle with Menelaos the warlike
to fight together for the sake of Helen and all her possessions.
That one of us who wins and is proved stronger, let him
take the possessions fairly and the woman, and lead her homeward.
But the rest of you, having cut your oaths of faith and friendship,
dwell, you in Troy where the soil is rich, while those others return
home
to horse-pasturing Argos, and Achaia the land of fair women.”
So he spoke, and Hektor hearing his word was happy
and went into the space between and forced back the Trojan battalions
holding his spear by the middle until they were all seated.
But the flowing-haired Achaians kept pointing their bows at him
with arrows and with flung stones striving ever to strike him
until Agamemnon lord of men cried out in a great voice:
“Argives, hold: cast at him no longer, O sons of the Achaians.
Hektor of the shining helm is trying to tell us something.”
So he spoke, and they stopped fighting and suddenly all fell
silent; but Hektor between them spoke now to both sides:
“Hear from me, Trojans and strong-greaved Achaians, the word
of Alexandros, for whose sake this strife has arisen.
He would have all the rest of the Trojans and all the Achaians
lay aside on the bountiful earth their splendid armor
while he himself in the middle and warlike Menelaos
fight alone for the sake of Helen and all her possessions.
That one of them who wins and is proved stronger, let him
take the possessions fairly and the woman, and lead her homeward
while the rest of us cut our oaths of faith and friendship.”

95

So he spoke, and all of them stayed stricken to silence;
but among them spoke out Menelaos of the great war cry:
“Listen now to me also; since beyond all others this sorrow
comes closest to my heart, and I think the Argives and Trojans
can go free of each other at last. You have suffered much evil
100 for the sake of this my quarrel since Alexandros began it.
As for that one of us two to whom death and doom are given,
let him die: the rest of you be made friends with each other.
Bring two lambs: let one be white and the other black for
Earth and the Sun God, and for Zeus we will bring yet another.
105 Bring, that he may seal the pledges, the strength of Priam:
Priam himself, for his sons are outrageous, not to be trusted;
lest some man overstep Zeus’ oaths, and make them be nothing.
Always it is, that the hearts in the younger men are frivolous,
but when an elder man is among them, he looks behind him
110 and in front, so that all comes out far better for both sides.”
So he spoke, and the Trojans and Achaians were joyful,
hoping now to be rid of all the sorrow of warfare.
They pulled their chariots into line, and themselves dismounted
and stripped off their armor which was laid on the ground beside them,
115 close together, so there was little ground left between them.
Hektor sent away to the citadel two heralds
lightly to bring down the lambs, and to summon Priam;
and powerful Agamemnon in turn sent Talthybios
to go down to the hollow ships, with orders to bring two
120 lambs: he did not disobey the order of great Agamemnon.
Now to Helen of the white arms came a messenger, Iris,
in the likeness of her sister-in-law, the wife of Antenor’s
son, whom strong Helikaon wed, the son of Antenor,
Laodikē, loveliest looking of all the daughters of Priam.
125 She came on Helen in the chamber; she was weaving a great web,
a red folding robe, and working into it the numerous struggles
of Trojans, breakers of horses, and bronze-armored Achaians,

struggles that they endured for her sake at the hands of the war god.
Iris of the swift feet stood beside her and spoke to her:
130 “Come with me, dear girl, to behold the marvelous things done
by Trojans, breakers of horses, and bronze-armored Achaians,
who just now carried sorrowful war against each other,
in the plain, and all their desire was for deadly fighting;
now they are all seated in silence, the fighting has ended;
135 they lean on their shields, the tall spears stuck in the ground beside
them.
But Menelaos the warlike and Alexandros will fight
with long spears against each other for your possession.
You shall be called beloved wife of the man who wins you.”
Speaking so the goddess left in her heart sweet longing
140 after her husband of time before, and her city and parents.
And at once, wrapping herself about in shimmering garments,
she went forth from the chamber, letting fall a light tear;
not by herself, since two handmaidens went to attend her,
Aithre, Pittheus’ daughter, and Klymenē of the ox eyes.
145 Rapidly they came to the place where the Skaian gates stood.
Now those who sat with Priam: Panthoös and Thymoites,
Lampos and Klytios, Hiketaon, scion of Ares,
with Antenor and Oukalegon, both men of good counsel:
these were seated by the Skaian gates, elders of the people.
150 Now through old age these fought no longer, yet were they excellent
speakers still, and clear, as cicadas who through the forest
settle on trees, to issue their delicate voice of singing.
Such were they who sat on the tower, chief men of the Trojans.
And these, as they saw Helen along the tower approaching,
155 murmuring softly to each other uttered their winged words:
“Surely there is no blame on Trojans and strong-greaved Achaians
if for long time they suffer hardship for a woman like this one.
Terrible is the likeness of her face to immortal goddesses.
Still, though she be such, let her go away in the ships, lest
160 she be left behind, a grief to us and our children.”
So they spoke: but Priam aloud called out to Helen:

“Come over where I am, dear child, and sit down beside me,
to look at your husband of time past, your friends and your people.
I am not blaming you: to me the gods are blameworthy
165 who drove upon me this sorrowful war against the Achaians.
So you could tell me the name of this man who is so tremendous;
who is this Achaian man of power and stature?
Though in truth there are others taller by a head than he is,
yet these eyes have never yet looked on a man so splendid
170 nor so lordly as this: such a man might well be royal.”
Helen, the shining among women, answered and spoke to him:
“Always to me, beloved father, you are feared and respected;
and I wish bitter death had been what I wanted, when I came hither
following your son, forsaking my chamber, my kinsmen,
175 my grown child, and the loveliness of girls my own age.
It did not happen that way: and now I am worn with weeping.
This now I will tell you in answer to the question you asked me.
That man is Atreus’ son Agamemnon, widely powerful,
at the same time a good king and a strong spearfighter,
180 once my kinsman, slut that I am. Did this ever happen?”
This she said, and the old man spoke again, wondering at him:
“O son of Atreus, blessed, child of fortune and favor,
many are these beneath your sway, these sons of the Achaians.
Once before this time I visited Phrygia of the vineyards.
185 There I looked on the Phrygian men with their swarming horses,
so many of them, the people of Otreus and godlike Mygdon,
whose camp was spread at that time along the banks of Sangarios:
and I myself, a helper in war, was marshaled among them
on that day when the Amazon women came, men’s equals.
190 Yet even they were not so many as these glancing-eyed Achaians.”
Next again the old man asked her, seeing Odysseus:
“Tell me of this one also, dear child; what man can he be,
shorter in truth by a head than Atreus’ son Agamemnon,
but broader, it would seem, in the chest and across the shoulders.
195 Now as his armor lies piled on the prospering earth, still he
ranges, like some ram, through the marshaled ranks of the fighters.

Truly, to some deep-fleeced ram would I liken him
who makes his way through the great mass of the shining sheepflocks.”
Helen, the daughter descended of Zeus, spoke then in answer:
200 “This one is Laërtes’ son, resourceful Odysseus,
who grew up in the country, rough though it be, of Ithaka,
to know every manner of shiftiness and crafty counsels.”
In his turn Antenor of the good counsel answered her:
“Surely this word you have spoken, my lady, can be no falsehood.
205 Once in the days before now brilliant Odysseus came here
with warlike Menelaos, and their embassy was for your sake.
To both of these I gave in my halls kind entertainment
and I learned the natural way of both, and their close counsels.
Now when these were set before the Trojans assembled
210 and stood up, Menelaos was bigger by his broad shoulders
but Odysseus was the more lordly when both were seated.
Now before all when both of them spun their speech and their counsels,
Menelaos indeed spoke rapidly, in few words
but exceedingly lucid, since he was no long speaker
215 nor one who wasted his words though he was only a young man.
But when that other drove to his feet, resourceful Odysseus,
he would just stand and stare down, eyes fixed on the ground beneath
him,
nor would he gesture with the staff backward and forward, but hold it
clutched hard in front of him, like any man who knows nothing.
220 Yes, you would call him a sullen man, and a fool likewise.
But when he let the great voice go from his chest, and the words came
drifting down like the winter snows, then no other mortal
man beside could stand up against Odysseus. Then we
wondered less beholding Odysseus’ outward appearance.”

225

Third in order, looking at Aias, the old man asked her:
“Who then is this other Achaian of power and stature
towering above the Argives by head and broad shoulders?”

Helen with the light robes and shining among women answered him:
“That one is gigantic Aias, wall of the Achaians,
230 and beyond him there is Idomeneus like a god standing
among the Kretans, and the lords of Krete are gathered about him.
Many a time warlike Menelaos would entertain him
in our own house when he came over from Krete. And I see them
all now, all the rest of the glancing-eyed Achaians,
235 all whom I would know well by sight, whose names I could tell you,
yet nowhere can I see those two, the marshals of the people,
Kastor, breaker of horses, and the strong boxer, Polydeukes,
my own brothers, born with me of a single mother.
Perhaps these came not with the rest from Lakedaimon the lovely,
240 or else they did come here in their sea-wandering ships, yet
now they are reluctant to go with the men into battle
dreading the words of shame and all the reproach that is on me.”
So she spoke, but the teeming earth lay already upon them
away in Lakedaimon, the beloved land of their fathers.

245

Now through the town the heralds brought the symbols of oaths
pledged,
two young rams, and cheerful wine, the yield of the tilled land
in a goatskin wine sack, while another carried the shining
mixing bowl (the herald Idaios) and the golden wine cups.
Standing beside the aged man he spoke words to arouse him:
250 “Son of Laomedon, rise up: you are called by the chief men
of Trojans, breakers of horses, and bronze-armored Achaians
to come down into the plain that you may seal the oaths pledged.
For warlike Menelaos and Alexandros are to fight
with long spears against each other for the sake of the woman.
255 Let the woman go to the winner, and all the possessions.
Let the rest of them, cutting their oaths of faith and friendship,
dwell, we in Troy where the soil is rich, while those others return home
to horse-pasturing Argos and Achaia the land of fair women.”
So he spoke, and the old man shuddered, but called his companions

260 to yoke the horses to the car, and they promptly obeyed him.
And Priam mounted into the car and gathered the reins back
as Antenor beside him stepped into the fair-wrought chariot.
Through the Skaian gates to the plain they steered the swift horses.
Now when these had come among the Trojans and Achaians,
265 they stepped down on the prospering earth from their car with horses
and made their way striding among the Achaians and Trojans.
On the other side rose up the lord of men, Agamemnon,
and the resourceful Odysseus rose up. Meanwhile the proud heralds
led up the victims for the gods’ oaths, and in a great wine-bowl
270 mixed the wine, and poured water over the hands of the princes.
Atreus’ son laid hands upon his work-knife, and drew it
from where it hung ever beside the mighty sheath of his war sword
and cut off hairs from the heads of the lambs; and the heralds thereafter
passed these about to all the princes of the Trojans and Achaians.
275 Atreus’ son uplifting his hands then prayed in a great voice:
“Father Zeus, watching over us from Ida, most high, most honored,
and Helios, you who see all things, who listen to all things,
earth, and rivers, and you who under the earth take vengeance
on dead men, whoever among them has sworn to falsehood,
280 you shall be witnesses, to guard the oaths of fidelity.
If it should be that Alexandros slays Menelaos,
let him keep Helen for himself, and all her possessions,
and we in our seafaring ships shall take our way homeward.
But if the fair-haired Menelaos kills Alexandros,
285 then let the Trojans give back Helen and all her possessions,
and pay also a price to the Argives which will be fitting,
which among people yet to come shall be as a standard.
Then if Priam and the sons of Priam are yet unwilling
after Alexandros has fallen to pay me the penalty,
290 I myself shall fight hereafter for the sake of the ransom,
here remaining, until I have won to the end of my quarrel.”
So he spoke, and with pitiless bronze he cut the lambs’ throats,
letting them fall gasping again to the ground, the life breath
going away, since the strength of the bronze had taken it from them.
295 Drawing the wine from the mixing bowls in the cups, they poured it

forth, and made their prayer to the gods who live everlasting.
And thus would murmur any man, Achaian or Trojan:
“Zeus, exalted and mightiest, and you other immortals,
let those, whichever side they may be, who do wrong to the oaths
sworn
300 first, let their brains be spilled on the ground as this wine is spilled
now,
theirs and their sons’, and let their wives be the spoil of others.”
They spoke, but none of this would the son of Kronos accomplish.
Now among them spoke Priam descended of Dardanos also:
“Listen to me, you Trojans and you strong-greaved Achaians.
305 Now I am going away to windy Ilion, homeward,
since I cannot look with these eyes on the sight of my dear son
fighting against warlike Menelaos in single combat.
Zeus knows—maybe he knows—and the rest of the gods immortal
for which of the two death is appointed to end this matter.”
310 He spoke, a godlike man, and laid the lambs in the chariot,
and mounted into it himself, and pulled the reins backward.
Antenor beside him stepped up into the fair-wrought chariot.
These two took their way backward and made for Ilion.
Hektor now, the son of Priam, and brilliant Odysseus
315 measured out the distance first, and thereafter picked up
two lots, and put them in a brazen helmet, and shook them,
to see which one of the two should be first to cast with his bronze
spear,
and the people on each side held up their hands to the gods, and prayed
to them. Thus would murmur any man, Achaian or Trojan:
320 “Father Zeus, watching over us from Ida, most high, most honored,
whichever man has made what has happened happen to both sides,
grant that he be killed and go down to the house of Hades.
Let the friendship and the sworn faith be true for the rest of us.”
So they spoke, and tall Hektor of the shining helm shook
325 the lots, looking backward, and at once Paris’ lot was outshaken.
All the rest sat down in their ranks on the ground, at the place where
the glittering armor of each was piled by his light-footed horses,

while one of them put about his shoulders his splendid armor,
brilliant Alexandros, the lord of lovely-haired Helen.
330 First he placed along his legs the fair greaves linked with
silver fastenings to hold the greaves at the ankles.
Afterward he girt on about his chest the corselet
of Lykaon his brother since this fitted him also.
Across his shoulders he slung the sword with the nails of silver,
335 a bronze sword, and above it the great shield, huge and heavy.
Over his powerful head he set the well-fashioned helmet
with the horse-hair crest, and the plumes nodded terribly above it.
He took up a strong-shafted spear that fitted his hand’s grip.
In the same way warlike Menelaos put on his armor.

340

Now when these two were armed on either side of the battle,
they strode into the space between the Achaians and Trojans,
looking terror at each other; and amazement seized the beholders,
Trojans, breakers of horses, and strong-greaved Achaians.
They took their stand in the measured space not far from each other
345 raging each at the other man and shaking their spearshafts.
First of the two Alexandros let go his spear far-shadowing
and struck the shield of Atreus’ son on its perfect circle
nor did the bronze point break its way through, but the spearhead bent
back
in the strong shield. And after him Atreus’ son, Menelaos,
350 was ready to let go the bronze spear, with a prayer to Zeus father:
“Zeus, lord, grant me to punish the man who first did me injury,
brilliant Alexandros, and beat him down under my hands’ strength
that any one of the men to come may shudder to think of
doing evil to a kindly host, who has given him friendship.”
355 So he spoke, and balanced the spear far-shadowed, and threw it
and struck the shield of Priam’s son on its perfect circle.
All the way through the glittering shield went the heavy spearhead
and smashed its way through the intricately worked corselet;
straight ahead by the flank the spearhead shore through his tunic,

360 yet he bent away to one side and avoided the dark death.
Drawing his sword with the silver nails, the son of Atreus
heaving backward struck at the horn of his helmet; the sword-blade
three times broken and four times broken fell from his hand’s grip.
Groaning, the son of Atreus lifted his eyes to the wide sky:
365 “Father Zeus, no God beside is more baleful than you are.
Here I thought to punish Alexandros for his wickedness;
and now my sword is broken in my hands, and the spear flew vainly
out of my hands on the throw before, and I have not hit him.”
He spoke, and flashing forward laid hold of the horse-haired helmet
370 and spun him about, and dragged him away toward the strong-greaved
Achaians,
for the broidered strap under the softness of his throat strangled Paris,
fastened under his chin to hold on the horned helmet.
Now he would have dragged him away and won glory forever
had not Aphrodite daughter of Zeus watched sharply.
375 She broke the chinstrap, made from the hide of a slaughtered bullock,
and the helmet came away empty in the heavy hand of Atreides.
The hero whirled the helmet about and sent it flying
among the strong-greaved Achaians, and his staunch companions
retrieved it.
He turned and made again for his man, determined to kill him
380 with the bronze spear. But Aphrodite caught up Paris
easily, since she was divine, and wrapped him in a thick mist
and set him down again in his own perfumed bedchamber.
She then went away to summon Helen, and found her
on the high tower, with a cluster of Trojan women about her.
385 She laid her hand upon the robe immortal, and shook it,
and spoke to her, likening herself to an aged woman,
a wool-dresser who when she was living in Lakedaimon
made beautiful things out of wool, and loved her beyond all others.
Likening herself to this woman Aphrodite spoke to her:
390 “Come with me: Alexandros sends for you to come home to him.
He is in his chamber now, in the bed with its circled pattern,
shining in his raiment and his own beauty; you would not think

that he came from fighting against a man; you would think he was
going
rather to a dance, or rested and had been dancing lately.”
395 So she spoke, and troubled the spirit in Helen’s bosom.
She, as she recognized the round, sweet throat of the goddess
and her desirable breasts and her eyes that were full of shining,
she wondered, and spoke a word and called her by name, thus:
“Strange divinity! Why are you still so stubborn to beguile me?
400 Will you carry me further yet somewhere among cities
fairly settled? In Phrygia or in lovely Maionia?
Is there some mortal man there also who is dear to you?
Is it because Menelaos has beaten great Alexandros
and wishes, hateful even as I am, to carry me homeward,
405 is it for this that you stand in your treachery now beside me?
Go yourself and sit beside him, abandon the gods’ way,
turn your feet back never again to the path of Olympos
but stay with him forever, and suffer for him, and look after him
until he makes you his wedded wife, or makes you his slave girl.
410 Not I. I am not going to him. It would be too shameful.
I will not serve his bed, since the Trojan women hereafter
would laugh at me, all, and my heart even now is confused with
sorrows.”
Then in anger Aphrodite the shining spoke to her:
“Wretched girl, do not tease me lest in anger I forsake you
415 and grow to hate you as much as now I terribly love you,
lest I encompass you in hard hate, caught between both sides,
Danaäns and Trojans alike, and you wretchedly perish.”
So she spoke, and Helen daughter of Zeus was frightened
and went, shrouding herself about in the luminous spun robe,
420 silent, unseen by the Trojan women, and led by the goddess.
When they had come to Alexandros’ splendidly wrought house,
the rest of them, the handmaidens went speedily to their own work,
but she, shining among women, went to the high-vaulted bedchamber.
Aphrodite the sweetly laughing drew up an armchair,
425 carrying it, she, a goddess, and set it before Alexandros,

and Helen, daughter of Zeus of the aegis, took her place there
turning her eyes away, and spoke to her lord in derision:
“So you came back from fighting. Oh, how I wish you had died there
beaten down by the stronger man, who was once my husband.
430 There was a time before now you boasted that you were better
than warlike Menelaos, in spear and hand and your own strength.
Go forth now and challenge warlike Menelaos
once again to fight you in combat. But no: I advise you
rather to let it be, and fight no longer with fair-haired
435 Menelaos, strength against strength in single combat
recklessly. You might very well go down before his spear.”
Paris then in turn spoke to her thus and answered her:
“Lady, censure my heart no more in bitter reprovals.
This time Menelaos with Athene’s help has beaten me;
440 another time I shall beat him. We have gods on our side also.
Come, then, rather let us go to bed and turn to lovemaking.
Never before as now has passion enmeshed my senses,
not when I took you the first time from Lakedaimon the lovely
and caught you up and carried you away in seafaring vessels,
445 and lay with you in the bed of love on the island Kranaë,
not even then, as now, did I love you and sweet desire seize me.”
Speaking, he led the way to the bed; and his wife went with him.
So these two were laid in the carven bed. But Atreides
ranged like a wild beast up and down the host, to discover
450 whether he could find anywhere godlike Alexandros.
Yet could none of the Trojans nor any renowned companion
show Alexandros then to warlike Menelaos.
These would not have hidden him for love, if any had seen him,
since he was hated among them all as dark death is hated.
455 Now among them spoke forth the lord of men Agamemnon:
“Listen to me, O Trojans, Dardanians and companions:
clearly the victory is with warlike Menelaos.
Do you therefore give back, with all her possessions, Helen
of Argos, and pay a price that shall be befitting,
460 which among people yet to come shall be as a standard.”

So spoke Atreus’ son, and the other Achaians applauded him.

BOOK FOUR

5

10

15

20

25

Now the gods at the side of Zeus were sitting in council
over the golden floor, and among them the goddess Hebe
poured them nectar as wine, while they in the golden drinking-cups
drank to each other, gazing down on the city of the Trojans.
Presently the son of Kronos was minded to anger
Hera, if he could, with words off ensive, speaking to cross her:
“Two among the goddesses stand by Menelaos,
Hera of Argos, and Athene who stands by her people.
Yet see, here they are sitting apart, looking on at the fighting,
and take their pleasure. Meanwhile laughing Aphrodite forever
stands by her man and drives the spirits of death away from him.
Even now she has rescued him when he thought he would perish.
So, the victory now is with warlike Menelaos.
Let us consider then how these things shall be accomplished,
whether again to stir up grim warfare and the terrible
fighting, or cast down love and make them friends with each other.
If somehow this way could be sweet and pleasing to all of us,
the city of lord Priam might still be a place men dwell in,
and Menelaos could take away with him Helen of Argos.”
So he spoke; and Athene and Hera muttered, since they were
sitting close to each other, devising evil for the Trojans.
Still Athene stayed silent and said nothing, but only
sulked at Zeus her father, and savage anger took hold of her.
But the heart of Hera could not contain her anger, and she spoke forth:
“Majesty, son of Kronos, what sort of thing have you spoken?
How can you wish to make wasted and fruitless all this endeavor,
the sweat that I have sweated in toil, and my horses worn out
gathering my people, and bringing evil to Priam and his children.

30

35

40

45

50

55

60

Do it then; but not all the rest of us gods will approve you.”
Deeply troubled, Zeus who gathers the clouds answered her:
“Dear lady, what can be all the great evils done to you
by Priam and the sons of Priam, that you are thus furious
forever to bring down the strong-founded city of Ilion?
If you could walk through the gates and through the towering ramparts
and eat Priam and the children of Priam raw, and the other
Trojans, then, then only might you glut at last your anger.
Do as you please then. Never let this quarrel hereafter
be between you and me a bitterness for both of us.
And put away in your thoughts this other thing that I tell you:
whenever I in turn am eager to lay waste some city,
as I please, one in which are dwelling men who are dear to you,
you shall not stand in the way of my anger, but let me do it,
since I was willing to grant you this with my heart unwilling.
For of all the cities beneath the sun and the starry heaven
dwelt in by men who live upon earth, there has never been one
honored nearer to my heart than sacred Ilion
and Priam, and the people of Priam of the strong ash spear.
Never yet has my altar gone without fair sacrifice,
the libation and the savor, since this is our portion of honor.”
Then the goddess the ox-eyed lady Hera answered:
“Of all cities there are three that are dearest to my own heart:
Argos and Sparta and Mykenai of the wide ways. All these,
whenever they become hateful to your heart, sack utterly.
I will not stand up for these against you, nor yet begrudge you.
Yet if even so I bear malice and would not have you destroy them,
in malice I will accomplish nothing, since you are far stronger.
Yet my labor also should not be let go unaccomplished;
I am likewise a god, and my race is even what yours is,
and I am first of the daughters of devious-devising Kronos,
both ways, since I am eldest born and am called your consort,
yours, and you in turn are lord over all the immortals.
Come then, in this thing let us both give way to each other,
I to you, you to me, and so the rest of the immortal
gods will follow. Now in speed give orders to Athene

65 to visit horrible war again on Achaians and Trojans,
and try to make it so that the Trojans are first off enders
to do injury against the oaths to the far-famed Achaians.”
She spoke, nor did the father of gods and men disobey her,
but immediately he spoke in winged words to Athene:
70 “Go now swiftly to the host of the Achaians and Trojans
and try to make it so that the Trojans are first off enders
to do injury against the oaths to the far-famed Achaians.”
Speaking so he stirred up Athene, who was eager before this,
and she went in a flash of speed down the pinnacles of Olympos.
75 As when the son of devious-devising Kronos casts down
a star, portent to sailors or to widespread armies of peoples
glittering, and thickly the sparks of fire break from it,
in such likeness Pallas Athene swept flashing earthward
and plunged between the two hosts; and amazement seized the
beholders,
80 Trojans, breakers of horses, and strong-greaved Achaians.
And thus they would speak to each other, each looking at the man next
him:
“Surely again there will be evil war and terrible
fighting, or else now friendship is being set between both sides
by Zeus, who is appointed lord of the wars of mortals.”
85 Thus would murmur any man, Achaian or Trojan.
She in the likeness of a man merged among the Trojans assembled,
Laodokos, Antenor’s son, a powerful spearman,
searching for godlike Pandaros, if she might somewhere come on him.
She found the son of Lykaon, a man blameless and powerful,
90 standing still, and about him were the ranks of strong, shield-armored
people, who had followed him from the streams of Aisepos.
Speaking in winged words she stood beside him and spoke to him:
“Wise son of Lykaon, would you now let me persuade you?
So you might dare send a flying arrow against Menelaos
95 and win you glory and gratitude in the sight of all Trojans,
particularly beyond all else with prince Alexandros.
Beyond all beside you would carry away glorious gifts from him,

were he to see warlike Menelaos, the son of Atreus,
struck down by your arrow, and laid on the sorrowful corpse-fire.
100 Come then, let go an arrow against haughty Menelaos,
but make your prayer to Apollo the light-born, the glorious archer,
that you will accomplish a grand sacrifice of lambs first born
when you come home again to the city of sacred Zeleia.”
So spoke Athene, and persuaded the fool’s heart in him.
105 Straightway he unwrapped his bow, of the polished horn from
a running wild goat he himself had shot in the chest once,
lying in wait for the goat in a covert as it stepped down
from the rock, and hit it in the chest so it sprawled on the boulders.
The horns that grew from the goat’s head were sixteen palms’ length.
110 A bowyer working on the horn then bound them together,
smoothing them to a fair surface, and put on a golden string hook.
Pandaros strung his bow and put it in position, bracing it
against the ground, and his brave friends held their shields in front of
him
for fear the warlike sons of the Achaians might rise up and rush him
115 before he had struck warlike Menelaos, the son of Atreus.
He stripped away the lid of the quiver, and took out an arrow
feathered, and never shot before, transmitter of dark pain.
Swiftly he arranged the bitter arrow along the bowstring,
and made his prayer to Apollo the light-born, the glorious archer,
120 that he would accomplish a grand sacrifice of lambs first born
when he came home again to the city of sacred Zeleia.
He drew, holding at once the grooves and the ox-hide bowstring
and brought the string against his nipple, iron to the bowstave.
But when he had pulled the great weapon till it made a circle,
125 the bow groaned, and the string sang high, and the arrow, sharppointed,
leapt away, furious, to fly through the throng before it.
Still the blessed gods immortal did not forget you,
Menelaos, and first among them Zeus’ daughter, the spoiler,
who standing in front of you fended aside the tearing arrow.
130 She brushed it away from his skin as lightly as when a mother

brushes a fly away from her child who is lying in sweet sleep,
steering herself the arrow’s course straight to where the golden
belt buckles joined and the halves of his corselet were fitted together.
The bitter arrow was driven against the joining of the war belt
135 and passed clean through the war belt elaborately woven;
into the elaborately wrought corselet the shaft was driven
and the guard which he wore to protect his skin and keep the spears off,
which guarded him best, yet the arrow plunged even through this also
and with the very tip of its point it grazed the man’s skin
140 and straightway from the cut there gushed a cloud of dark blood.
As when some Maionian woman or Karian with purple
colors ivory, to make it a cheek piece for horses;
it lies away in an inner room, and many a rider
longs to have it, but it is laid up to be a king’s treasure,
145 two things, to be the beauty of the horse, the pride of the horseman:
so, Menelaos, your shapely thighs were stained with the color
of blood, and your legs also and the ankles beneath them.
Agamemnon the lord of men was taken with shuddering
fear as he saw how from the cut the dark blood trickled downward,
150 and Menelaos the warlike himself shuddered in terror;
but when he saw the binding strings and the hooked barbs outside
the wound, his spirit was gathered again back into him. Agamemnon
the powerful spoke to them, groaning heavily, and by the hand held
Menelaos, while their companions were mourning beside them:
155 “Dear brother, it was your death I sealed in the oaths of friendship,
setting you alone before the Achaians to fight with the Trojans.
So, the Trojans have struck you down and trampled on the oaths sworn.
Still the oaths and the blood of the lambs shall not be called vain,
the unmixed wine poured and the right hands we trusted.
160 If the Olympian at once has not finished this matter,
late will he bring it to pass, and they must pay a great penalty,
with their own heads, and with their women, and with their children.
For I know this thing well in my heart, and my mind knows it.
There will come a day when sacred Ilion shall perish,
165 and Priam, and the people of Priam of the strong ash spear,

and Zeus son of Kronos who sits on high, the sky-dwelling,
himself shall shake the gloom of his aegis over all of them
in anger for this deception. All this shall not go unaccomplished.
But I shall suffer a terrible grief for you, Menelaos,
170 if you die and fill out the destiny of your lifetime.
And I must return a thing of reproach to Argos the thirsty,
for now at once the Achaians will remember the land of their fathers;
and thus we would leave to Priam and to the Trojans Helen
of Argos, to glory over, while the bones of you rot in the ploughland
175 as you lie dead in Troy, on a venture that went unaccomplished.
And thus shall some Trojan speak in the proud show of his manhood,
leaping lightly as he speaks on the tomb of great Menelaos:
‘Might Agamemnon accomplish his anger thus against all his
enemies, as now he led here in vain a host of Achaians
180 and has gone home again to the beloved land of his fathers
with ships empty, and leaving behind him brave Menelaos.’
Thus shall a man speak: then let the wide earth open to take me.”
Then in encouragement fair-haired Menelaos spoke to him:
“Do not fear, nor yet make afraid the Achaian people.
185 The sharp arrow is not stuck in a mortal place, but the shining
war belt turned it aside from its course, and the flap beneath it
with my guard of armor that bronze-smiths wrought carefully for me.”
Then in answer again spoke powerful Agamemnon:
“May it only be as you say, O Menelaos, dear brother!
190 But the physician will handle the wound and apply over it
healing salves, by which he can put an end to the black pains.”
He spoke, and addressed Talthybios, his sacred herald:
“Talthybios, with all speed go call hither Machaon,
a man who is son of Asklepios and a blameless physician,
195 so that he may look at Menelaos, the warlike son of
Atreus, whom someone skilled in the bow’s use shot with an arrow,
Trojan or Lykian: glory to him, but to us a sorrow.”
He spoke, and the herald heard and did not disobey him,
but went on his way among the host of bronze-armored Achaians
200 looking about for the warrior Machaon; and saw him

standing still, and about him the strong ranks of shield-bearing
people, who had come with him from horse-pasturing Trikka.
He came and stood close beside him and addressed him in winged
words:
“Rise up, son of Asklepios; powerful Agamemnon calls you,
205 so that you may look at warlike Menelaos, the Achaians’
leader, whom someone skilled in the bow’s use shot with an arrow,
Trojan or Lykian: glory to him, but to us a sorrow.”
So he spoke, and stirred up the spirit within Machaon.
They went through the crowd along the widespread host of the
Achaians.
210 But when they had come to the place where fair-haired Menelaos
had been hit, where all the great men were gathered about him
in a circle, and he stood in the midst of them, a man godlike,
straightway he pulled the arrow forth from the joining of the war belt,
and as it was pulled out the sharp barbs were broken backward.
215 He slipped open the war belt then and the flap beneath it
with the guard of armor that bronze-smiths wrought carefully for him.
But when he saw the wound where the bitter arrow was driven,
he sucked the blood and in skill laid healing medicines on it
that Cheiron in friendship long ago had given his father.
220 While they were working over Menelaos of the great war cry
all this time came on the ranks of the armored Trojans.
The Achaians again put on their armor, and remembered their warcraft.
Then you would not have seen brilliant Agamemnon asleep nor
skulking aside, nor in any way a reluctant fighter,
225 but driving eagerly toward the fighting where men win glory.
He left aside his chariot gleaming with bronze, and his horses,
and these, breathing hard, were held aside by a henchman,
Eurymedon, born to Ptolemaios, the son of Peiraios.
Agamemnon told him to keep them well in hand, till the time came
230 when weariness might take hold of his limbs, through marshaling so
many.
Then he, on foot as he was, ranged through the ranks of his fighters.
Those of the fast-mounted Danaäns he found eager, he would

stand beside these and urge them harder on with words spoken:
“Argives, do not let go now of this furious valor.
235 Zeus the father shall not be one to give aid to liars,
but these, who were the first to do violence over the oaths sworn,
vultures shall feed upon the delicate skin of their bodies,
while we lead away their beloved wives and innocent
children, in our ships, after we have stormed their citadel.”
240 Any he might see hanging back from the hateful conflict
these in words of anger he would reproach very bitterly:
“Argives, you arrow-fighters, have you no shame, you disgraces?
Why are you simply standing there bewildered, like young deer
who after they are tired from running through a great meadow
245 stand there still, and there is no heart of courage within them?
Thus are you standing still bewildered and are not fighting.
Or are you waiting for the Trojans to come close, where the strongsterned
ships have been hauled up along the strand of the gray sea,
so you may know if Kronos’ son will hold his hand over you?”
250 Thus he ranged through the ranks of his men and set them in order.
On his way through the thronging men he came to the Kretans
who about valiant Idomeneus were arming for battle.
Idomeneus, like a boar in his strength, stood among the champions
while Meriones still urged along the last battalions.
255 Agamemnon the lord of men was glad as he looked at them
and in words of graciousness at once spoke to Idomeneus:
“I honor you, Idomeneus, beyond the fast-mounted
Danaäns whether in battle, or in any action whatever,
whether it be at the feast, when the great men of the Argives
260 blend in the mixing bowl the gleaming wine of the princes.
Even though all the rest of the flowing-haired Achaians
drink out their portion, still your cup stands filled forever
even as mine, for you to drink when the pleasure takes you.
Rise up then to battle, be such as you claimed in time past.”
265 Then in turn Idomeneus lord of the Kretans answered him:
“Son of Atreus, I will in truth be a staunch companion
in arms, as first I promised you and bent my head to it.

Rouse up rather the rest of the flowing-haired Achaians
so that we may fight in all speed, since the Trojans have broken
270 their oaths: a thing that shall be death and sorrow hereafter
to them, since they were the first to do violence over the oaths sworn.”
So he spoke, and Atreides, cheerful at heart, went onward.
On his way through the thronging men he came to the Aiantes.
These were armed, and about them went a cloud of foot-soldiers.
275 As from his watching place a goatherd watches a cloud move
on its way over the sea before the drive of the west wind;
far away though he be he watches it, blacker than pitch is,
moving across the sea and piling the storm before it,
and as he sees it he shivers and drives his flocks to a cavern;
280 so about the two Aiantes moved the battalions,
close-compacted of strong and god-supported young fighters,
black, and jagged with spear and shield, to the terror of battle.
Agamemnon the lord of men was glad when he looked at them,
and he spoke aloud to them and addressed them in winged words:
285 “Aiantes, O leaders of the bronze-armored Argives,
to you two I give no orders; it would not become me
to speed you, now that yourselves drive your people on to fight
strongly.
Father Zeus, and Athene, and Apollo, if only
such a spirit were in the hearts of all of my people.
290 Then perhaps the city of lord Priam would be bent
underneath our hands, captured and utterly taken.”
So he spoke, and left them there, and went among others.
There he came upon Nestor, the lucid speaker of Pylos,
setting in order his own companions and urging them to battle,
295 tall Pelagon with those about him, Alastor and Chromios,
Haimon the powerful, and Bias, shepherd of the people.
In front he ranged the mounted men with their horses and chariots,
and stationed the brave and numerous foot-soldiers behind them
to be the bastion of battle, and drove the cowards to the center
300 so that a man might be forced to fight even though unwilling.

First he gave orders to the drivers of horses, and warned them
to hold their horses in check and not be fouled in the multitude:
“Let no man in the pride of his horsemanship and his manhood
dare to fight alone with the Trojans in front of the rest of us,
305 neither let him give ground, since that way you will be weaker.
When a man from his own car encounters the enemy chariots
let him stab with his spear, since this is the stronger fighting.
So the men before your time sacked tower and city,
keeping a spirit like this in their hearts, and like this their purpose.”
310 Thus the old man wise in fighting from of old encouraged them.
Agamemnon the lord of men was glad when he looked at him
and he spoke aloud to him and addressed him in winged words:
“Aged sir, if only, as the spirit is in your bosom,
so might your knees be also and the strength stay steady within you;
315 but age weakens you which comes to all; if only some other
of the fighters had your age and you were one of the young men!”
Nestor the Gerenian horseman spoke and answered him:
“Son of Atreus, so would I also wish to be that
man I was, when I cut down brilliant Ereuthalion.
320 But the gods give to mortals not everything at the same time;
if I was a young man then, now in turn old age is upon me.
Yet even so I shall be among the riders, and command them
with word and counsel; such is the privilege of the old men.
The young spearmen shall do the spear-fighting, those who are born
325 of a generation later than mine, who trust in their own strength.”
So he spoke, and Atreides, cheerful at heart, went onward.
He came on the son of Peteos, Menestheus, driver of horses,
standing still, and about him the Athenians, urgent for battle.
Next to these resourceful Odysseus had taken position,
330 and beside him the Kephallenian ranks, no weak ones,
were standing, since the men had not heard the clamor of battle
but even now fresh set in motion the battalions moved
of Achaians and Trojans, breakers of horses; so these standing
waited, until some other mass of Achaians advancing
335 might crash against the Trojans, and the battle be opened.

Seeing these the lord of men Agamemnon scolded them
and spoke aloud to them and addressed them in winged words, saying:
“Son of Peteos, the king supported by God: and you, too,
you with your mind forever on profit and your ways of treachery,
340 why do you stand here skulking aside, and wait for the others?
For you two it is becoming to stand among the foremost
fighters, and endure your share of the blaze of battle;
since indeed you two are first to hear of the feasting
whenever we Achaians make ready a feast of the princes.
345 There it is your pleasure to eat the roast flesh, to drink
as much as you please the cups of the wine that is sweet as honey.
Now, though, you would be pleased to look on though ten battalions
of Achaians were to fight with the pitiless bronze before you.”
Then looking at him darkly resourceful Odysseus spoke to him:
350 “What is this word that broke through the fence of your teeth,
Atreides?
How can you say that, when we Achaians waken the bitter
war god on Trojans, breakers of horses, I hang back from
fighting? Only watch, if you care to and if it concerns you,
the very father of Telemachos locked with the champion
355 Trojans, breakers of horses. Your talk is wind, and no meaning.”
Powerful Agamemnon in turn answered him, laughing,
seeing that he was angered and taking back the word spoken:
“Son of Laërtes and seed of Zeus, resourceful Odysseus:
I must not be niggling with you, nor yet give you orders,
360 since I know how the spirit in your secret heart knows
ideas of kindness only; for what you think is what I think.
Come now, I will make it good hereafter, if anything evil
has been said; let the gods make all this come to nothing.”
So he spoke, and left him there, and went among others.
365 He came on the son of Tydeus, high-spirited Diomedes,
standing among the compacted chariots and by the horses,
and Kapaneus’ son, Sthenelos, was standing beside him. At sight
of Diomedes the lord of men Agamemnon scolded him
and spoke aloud to him and addressed him in winged words, saying:

370 “Ah me, son of Tydeus, that daring breaker of horses,
why are you skulking and spying out the outworks of battle?
Such was never Tydeus’ way, to lurk in the background,
but to fight the enemy far ahead of his own companions.
So they say who had seen him at work, since I never saw nor
375 encountered him ever; but they say he surpassed all others.
Once on a time he came, but not in war, to Mykenai
with godlike Polyneikes, a guest and a friend, assembling
people, since these were attacking the sacred bastions of Thebe,
and much they entreated us to grant him renowned companions.
380 And our men wished to give them and were assenting to what they
asked for
but Zeus turned them back, showing forth portents that crossed them.
Now as these went forward and were well on their way, and came
to the river Asopos, and the meadows of grass and the deep rushes,
from there the Achaians sent Tydeus ahead with a message.
385 He went then and came on the Kadmeians in their numbers
feasting all about the house of mighty Eteokles.
There, stranger though he was, the driver of horses, Tydeus,
was not frightened, alone among so many Kadmeians,
but dared them to try their strength with him, and bested all of them
390 easily, such might did Pallas Athene give him.
The Kadmeians who lash their horses, in anger compacted
an ambuscade of guile on his way home, assembling together
fifty fighting men, and for these there were two leaders,
Maion, Haimon’s son, in the likeness of the immortals,
395 with the son of Autophonos, Polyphontes stubborn in battle.
On these men Tydeus let loose a fate that was shameful.
He killed them all, except that he let one man get home again,
letting Maion go in obedience to the god’s signs.
This was Tydeus, the Aitolian; yet he was father
400 to a son worse than himself at fighting, better in conclave.”
So he spoke, and strong Diomedes gave no answer
in awe before the majesty of the king’s rebuking;
but the son of Kapaneus the glorious answered him, saying:
“Son of Atreus, do not lie when you know the plain truth.

405 We two claim we are better men by far than our fathers.
We did storm the seven-gated foundation of Thebe
though we led fewer people beneath a wall that was stronger.
We obeyed the signs of the gods and the help Zeus gave us,
while those others died of their own headlong stupidity.
410 Therefore, never liken our fathers to us in honor.”
Then looking at him darkly strong Diomedes spoke to him:
“Friend, stay quiet rather and do as I tell you; I will
find no fault with Agamemnon, shepherd of the people,
for stirring thus into battle the strong-greaved Achaians;
415 this will be his glory to come, if ever the Achaians
cut down the men of Troy and capture sacred Ilion.
If the Achaians are slain, then his will be the great sorrow.
Come, let you and me remember our fighting courage.”
He spoke and leapt in all his gear to the ground from the chariot,
420 and the bronze armor girt to the chest of the king clashed terribly
as he sprang. Fear would have gripped even a man stout-hearted.
As when along the thundering beach the surf of the sea strikes
beat upon beat as the west wind drives it onward; far out
cresting first on the open water, it drives thereafter
425 to smash roaring along the dry land, and against the rock jut
bending breaks itself into crests spewing back the salt wash;
so thronged beat upon beat the Danaäns’ close battalions
steadily into battle, with each of the lords commanding
his own men; and these went silently, you would not think
430 all these people with voices kept in their chests were marching,
silently, in fear of their commanders; and upon all
glittered as they marched the shining armor they carried.
But the Trojans, as sheep in a man of possessions’ steading
stand in their myriads waiting to be drained of their white milk
435 and bleat interminably as they hear the voice of their lambs, so
the crying of the Trojans went up through the wide army.
Since there was no speech nor language common to all of them
but their talk was mixed, who were called there from many far places.
Ares drove these on, and the Achaians gray-eyed Athene,

440 and Terror drove them, and Fear, and Hate whose wrath is relentless,
she the sister and companion of murderous Ares,
she who is only a little thing at the first, but thereafter
grows until she strides on the earth with her head striking heaven.
She then hurled down bitterness equally between both sides
445 as she walked through the onslaught making men’s pain heavier.
Now as these advancing came to one place and encountered,
they dashed their shields together and their spears, and the strength
of armored men in bronze, and the shields massive in the middle
clashed against each other, and the sound grew huge of the fighting.
450 There the screaming and the shouts of triumph rose up together
of men killing and men killed, and the ground ran blood.
As when rivers in winter spate running down from the mountains
throw together at the meeting of streams the weight of their water
out of the great springs behind in the hollow stream-bed,
455 and far away in the mountains the shepherd hears their thunder;
such, from the coming together of men, was the shock and the
shouting.
Antilochos was first to kill a chief man of the Trojans,
valiant among the champions, Thalysias’ son, Echepolos.
Throwing first, he struck the horn of the horse-haired helmet,
460 and the bronze spearpoint fixed in his forehead and drove inward
through the bone; and a mist of darkness clouded both eyes
and he fell as a tower falls in the strong encounter.
As he dropped, Elephenor the powerful caught him by the feet,
Chalkodon’s son, and lord of the great-hearted Abantes,
465 and dragged him away from under the missiles, striving in all speed
to strip the armor from him, yet his outrush went short-lived.
For as he hauled the corpse high-hearted Agenor, marking
the ribs that showed bare under the shield as he bent over,
stabbed with the bronze-pointed spear and unstrung his sinews.
470 So the spirit left him and over his body was fought out
weary work by Trojans and Achaians, who like wolves
sprang upon one another, with man against man in the onfall.

There Telamonian Aias struck down the son of Anthemion
Simoeisios in his stripling’s beauty, whom once his mother
475 descending from Ida bore beside the banks of Simoeis
when she had followed her father and mother to tend the sheepflocks.
Therefore they called him Simoeisios; but he could not
render again the care of his dear parents; he was short-lived,
beaten down beneath the spear of high-hearted Aias,
480 who struck him as he first came forward beside the nipple
of the right breast, and the bronze spearhead drove clean through the
shoulder.
He dropped then to the ground in the dust, like some black poplar,
which in the land low-lying about a great marsh grows
smooth trimmed yet with branches growing at the uttermost tree-top:
485 one whom a man, a maker of chariots, fells with the shining
iron, to bend it into a wheel for a fine-wrought chariot,
and the tree lies hardening by the banks of a river.
Such was Anthemion’s son Simoeisios, whom illustrious
Aias killed. Now Antiphos of the shining corselet,
490 Priam’s son, made a cast at him in the crowd with the sharp spear
but missed Aias and struck Leukos, a brave companion
of Odysseus, in the groin, as he dragged a corpse off,
so that the body dropped from his hand as he fell above it.
For his killing Odysseus was stirred to terrible anger
495 and he strode out among the champions, helmed in bright bronze,
and stood close to the enemy hefting the shining javelin,
glaring round about him; and the Trojans gave way in the face
of the man throwing with the spear. And he made no vain cast,
but struck down Demokoön, a son of Priam, a bastard,
500 who came over from Abydos, and left his fast-running horses.
Odysseus struck him with the spear, in anger for his companion,
in the temple, and the bronze spearhead drove through the other
temple also, so that a mist of darkness clouded both eyes.
He fell, thunderously, and his armor clattered upon him.
505 The champions of Troy gave back then, and glorious Hektor,
and the Argives gave a great cry, and dragged back the bodies,
and drove their way far forward, but now Apollo watching

from high Pergamos was angered, and called aloud to the Trojans:
“Rise up, Trojans, breakers of horses, bend not from battle
510 with these Argives. Surely their skin is not stone, not iron
to stand up under the tearing edge of the bronze as it strikes them.
No, nor is Achilleus the child of lovely-haired Thetis fighting,
but beside the ship mulls his heartsore anger.”
So called the fearful god from the citadel, while Zeus’ daughter
515 Tritogeneia, goddess most high, drove on the Achaians,
any of them she saw hanging back as she strode through the battle.
Now his doom caught fast Amaryngkeus’ son Diores,
who with a jagged boulder was smitten beside the ankle
in the right shin, and a lord of the Thracian warriors threw it,
520 Peiros, son of Imbrasos, who had journeyed from Ainos.
The pitiless stone smashed utterly the tendons on both sides
with the bones, and he was hurled into the dust backward
reaching out both hands to his own beloved companions,
gasping life out; the stone’s thrower ran up beside him,
525 Peiros, and stabbed with his spear next the navel, and all his guts
poured
out on the ground, and a mist of darkness closed over both eyes.
Thoas the Aitolian hit Peiros as he ran backward
with the spear in the chest above the nipple, and the bronze point fixed
in the lung, and Thoas standing close dragged out the heavy
530 spear from his chest, and drawing his sharp sword struck him
in the middle of the belly, and so took the life from him,
yet did not strip his armor, for his companions about him
stood, Thracians with hair grown at the top, gripping their long spears,
and though he was a mighty man and a strong and proud one
535 thrust him from them so that he gave ground backward, staggering.
So in the dust these two lay sprawled beside one another,
lords, the one of the Thracians, the other of the bronze-armored
Epeians; and many others beside were killed all about them.
There no more could a man who was in that work make light of it,
540 one who still unhit and still unstabbed by the sharp bronze
spun in the midst of that fighting, with Pallas Athene’s hold on

his hand guiding him, driving back the volleying spears thrown.
For on that day many men of the Achaians and Trojans
lay sprawled in the dust face downward beside one another.

BOOK FIVE

5

10

15

20

25

There to Tydeus’ son Diomedes Pallas Athene
granted strength and daring, that he might be conspicuous
among all the Argives and win the glory of valor.
She made weariless fire blaze from his shield and helmet
like that star of the waning summer who beyond all stars
rises bathed in the ocean stream to glitter in brilliance.
Such was the fire she made blaze from his head and his shoulders
and urged him into the middle fighting, where most were struggling.
There was a man of the Trojans, Dares, blameless and bountiful,
a priest consecrated to Hephaistos, and he had two sons,
Phegeus and Idaios, well skilled both in all fighting.
These two breaking from the ranks of the others charged against him
riding their chariot as Diomedes came on, dismounted.
Now as in their advance these had come close to each other
first of the two Phegeus let go his spear far-shadowing.
Over the left shoulder of Tydeus’ son passed the pointed
spear, nor struck his body, and Diomedes thereafter
threw with the bronze, and the weapon cast from his hand flew not vain
but struck the chest between the nipples and hurled him from behind
his horses. And Idaios leaping left the fair-wrought chariot
nor had he the courage to stand over his stricken brother.
Even so he could not have escaped the black death-spirit
but Hephaistos caught him away and rescued him, shrouded in
darkness,
that the aged man might not be left altogether desolate.
But the son of high-hearted Tydeus drove off the horses
and gave them to his company to lead back to the hollow vessels.

Now as the high-hearted Trojans watched the two sons of Dares,
one running away, and one cut down by the side of his chariot,
the anger in all of them was stirred. But gray-eyed Athene
30 took violent Ares by the hand, and in words she spoke to him:
“Ares, Ares, manslaughtering, blood-stained, stormer of strong walls,
shall we not leave the Trojans and Achaians to struggle
after whatever way Zeus father grants glory to either,
while we two give ground together and avoid Zeus’ anger?”

35

40

45

50

55

So she spoke, and led violent Ares out of the fighting
and afterward caused him to sit down by the sands of Skamandros
while the Danaäns bent the Trojans back, and each of the princes
killed his man. And first the lord of men Agamemnon
hurled tall Odios, lord of the Halizones, from his chariot.
For in his back even as he was turning the spear fixed
between the shoulders and was driven on through the chest beyond it.
He fell, thunderously, and his armor clattered upon him.
Idomeneus killed Phaistos the son of Maionian Boros,
who had come out of Tarne with the deep soil. Idomeneus
the spear-renowned stabbed this man just as he was mounting
behind his horses, with the long spear driven in the right shoulder.
He dropped from the chariot, and the hateful darkness took hold of him.
The henchmen of Idomeneus stripped the armor from Phaistos,
while Menelaos son of Atreus killed with the sharp spear
Strophios’ son, a man of wisdom in the chase, Skamandrios,
the fine huntsman of beasts. Artemis herself had taught him
to strike down every wild thing that grows in the mountain forest.
Yet Artemis of the showering arrows could not now help him,
no, nor the long spearcasts in which he had been pre-eminent,
but Menelaos the spear-famed, son of Atreus, stabbed him,
as he fled away before him, in the back with a spear thrust
between the shoulders and driven through to the chest beyond it.
He dropped forward on his face and his armor clattered upon him.
Meriones in turn killed Phereklos, son of Harmonides,

60 the smith, who understood how to make with his hand all intricate
things, since above all others Pallas Athene had loved him.
He it was who had built for Alexandros the balanced
ships, the beginning of the evil, fatal to the other
Trojans, and to him, since he knew nothing of the gods’ plans.
65 This man Meriones pursued and overtaking him
struck in the right buttock, and the spearhead drove straight
on and passing under the bone went into the bladder.
He dropped, screaming, to his knees, and death was a mist about him.
Meges in turn killed Pedaios, the son of Antenor,
70 who, bastard though he was, was nursed by lovely Theano
with close care, as for her own children, to pleasure her husband.
Now the son of Phyleus, the spear-famed, closing upon him
struck him with the sharp spear behind the head at the tendon,
and straight on through the teeth and under the tongue cut the bronze
blade,
75 and he dropped in the dust gripping in his teeth the cold bronze.
Eurypylos, Euaimon’s son, killed brilliant Hypsenor,
son of high-hearted Dolopion, he who was made Skamandros’
priest, and was honored about the countryside as a god is.
This man Eurypylos, the shining son of Euaimon,
80 running in chase as he fled before him struck in the shoulder
with a blow swept from the sword and cut the arm’s weight from him,
so that the arm dropped bleeding to the ground, and the red death
and destiny the powerful took hold of both eyes.
So they went at their work all about the strong encounter;
85 but you could not have told on which side Tydeus’ son was fighting,
whether he were one with the Trojans or with the Achaians,
since he went storming up the plain like a winter-swollen
river in spate that scatters the dikes in its running current,
one that the strong-compacted dikes can contain no longer,
90 nor do the mounded banks of the blossoming vineyards hold it
rising suddenly as Zeus’ rain makes heavy the water
and many lovely works of the young men crumble beneath it.
Like these the massed battalions of the Trojans were scattered

by Tydeus’ son, and many as they were could not stand against him.
95 Now as the shining son of Lykaon, Pandaros, watched him
storming up the plain scattering the battalions before him,
at once he strained the bent bow against the son of Tydeus,
and shot, and hit him as he charged forward, in the right shoulder
at the hollow of the corselet; and the bitter arrow went straight through
100 holding clean to its way, and the corselet was all blood-spattered.
And the shining son of Lykaon cried aloud in a great voice:
“Rise up, Trojans, O high-hearted, lashers of horses.
Now the best of the Achaians is hit, and I think that he will not
long hold up under the strong arrow, if truly Apollo
105 lord and son of Zeus stirred me to come forth from Lykia.”
“So he spoke, vaunting, but the swift arrow had not broken him,
only he drew back again to his chariot and horses,
and stood there, speaking to Sthenelos, son of Kapaneus:
Come, dear friend, son of Kapaneus, step down from the chariot,
110 so that you may pull out from my shoulder this bitter arrow.”
So he spoke, and Sthenelos sprang to the ground from his chariot
and standing beside him pulled the sharp arrow clean through his
shoulder
and the blood shot up spurting through the delicate tunic.
Now Diomedes of the great war cry spoke aloud, praying:
115 “Hear me now, Atrytone, daughter of Zeus of the aegis:
if ever before in kindliness you stood by my father
through the terror of fighting, be my friend now also, Athene;
grant me that I may kill this man and come within spearcast,
who shot me before I could see him, and now boasts over me, saying
120 I cannot live to look much longer on the shining sunlight.”
So he spoke in prayer, and Pallas Athene heard him.
She made his limbs light again, and his feet, and his hands above them,
and standing close beside him she spoke and addressed him in winged
words:
“Be of good courage now, Diomedes, to fight with the Trojans,
125 since I have put inside your chest the strength of your father
untremulous, such as the horseman Tydeus of the great shield

had; I have taken away the mist from your eyes, that before now
was there, so that you may well recognize the god and the mortal.
Therefore now, if a god making trial of you comes hither
130 do you not do battle head-on with the gods immortal,
not with the rest; but only if Aphrodite, Zeus’ daughter,
comes to the fighting, her at least you may stab with the sharp bronze.”
She spoke thus, gray-eyed Athene, and went, while Tydeus’
son closed once again with the champions, taking his place there;
135 raging as he had been before to fight with the Trojans,
now the strong rage tripled took hold of him, as of a lion
whom the shepherd among his fleecy flocks in the wild lands
grazed as he leapt the fence of the fold, but has not killed him,
but only stirred up the lion’s strength, and can no more fight him
140 off, but hides in the steading, and the frightened sheep are forsaken,
and these are piled pell-mell on each other in heaps, while the lion
raging still leaps out again over the fence of the deep yard;
such was the rage of strong Diomedes as he closed with the Trojans.
Next he killed Astynoös and Hypeiron, shepherd of the people,
145 striking one with the bronze-heeled spear above the nipple,
and cutting the other beside the shoulder through the collar-bone
with the great sword, so that neck and back were hewn free of the
shoulder.
He left these men, and went on after Polyidos and Abas,
sons of the aged dream-interpreter, Eurydamas;
150 yet for these two as they went forth the old man did not answer
their dreams, but Diomedes the powerful slew them. Now he
went after the two sons of Phainops, Xanthos and Thoön,
full grown both, but Phainops was stricken in sorrowful old age
nor could breed another son to leave among his possessions.
155 There he killed these two and took away the dear life from them
both, leaving to their father lamentation and sorrowful
affliction, since he was not to welcome them home from the fighting
alive still; and remoter kinsmen shared his possessions.
Next he killed two children of Dardanian Priam
160 who were in a single chariot, Echemmon and Chromios.

As among cattle a lion leaps on the neck of an ox or
heifer, that grazes among the wooded places, and breaks it,
so the son of Tydeus hurled both from their horses
hatefully, in spite of their struggles, then stripped their armor
165 and gave the horses to his company to drive to their vessels.
Now as Aineias saw him wrecking the ranks of warriors
he went on his way through the fighting and the spears’ confusion
looking to see if he could find Pandaros the godlike;
and he came upon the strong and blameless son of Lykaon.
170 He stood before him face to face and spoke a word to him:
“Pandaros, where now are your bow and your feathered arrows;
where your fame, in which no man here dare contend with you
nor can any man in Lykia claim he is better?
Come then, hold up your hands to Zeus, and let go an arrow
175 at this strong man, whoever he be, who does so much evil
to the Trojans, since many and great are those whose knees he has
broken.
Unless this be some god who in wrath with the Trojans for offerings
failed afflicts them. The wrath of a god is hard to deal with.”
Then in answer the shining son of Lykaon spoke to him:
180 “Aineias, charged with the counsels of the bronze-armored Trojans,
I liken him in all ways to the valiant son of Tydeus,
going by his shield and the hollow eyes of his helmet
and by the look of his horses; but it may be a god, I am not sure;
and if this is a man, as I think, and the valiant son
185 of Tydeus, yet not without god does he rage so, but some one
of the immortals, mantling in mist his shoulders, stands close beside
him
who turned my flying arrow as it struck, elsewhere, away from him.
For I have shot my shaft already, and hit him in the shoulder,
the right one, hard driven through the hollow of his corselet,
190 and I said to myself I had hurled him down to meet Aïdoneus,
yet still I have not beaten him; now this is some god who is angered.
But I have no horses nor chariot I could mount in, and yet
somewhere in the great house of Lykaon are eleven chariots,

beauties, all new made, just finished, and over them blankets
195 lie spread, and beside each chariot one brace of horses
stand there, champing their white barley and oats. But Lykaon
the aged spearman spoke to me over and over, as I was
on my way from the house well compacted, advising me;
he told me to take my horses and chariots, and riding
200 there to be lord among the Trojans in the strong encounters.
I did not let him persuade me, and that would have been far better,
sparing my horses, who had grown accustomed to eating all
they wished, from going hungry where the men were penned in a small
place.
So I left them and made my way on foot to Ilion
205 trusting my bow, a thing that was to profit me nothing.
For now I have drawn it against two of their best men, Tydeus’
son, and the son of Atreus, and both of these I hit
and drew visible blood, yet only wakened their anger.
So it was in bad luck that I took from its peg the curved bow
210 on that day when I carried it to lovely Ilion
at the head of my Trojans, bringing delight to brilliant Hektor.
Now if ever I win home again and lay eyes once more
on my country, and my wife, and the great house with the high roof,
let some stranger straightway cut my head from my shoulders
215 if I do not break this bow in my hands and throw it in the shining
fire, since as a wind and nothing I have taken it with me.”
Then in turn Aineias, lord of the Trojans, answered him:
“Speak no more this way; there will be no time for changing
before you and I must face this man with horses and chariot
220 and strength against strength fight it out with our weapons. Therefore
mount rather into my chariot, so that you may see
what the Trojan horses are like, how they understand their
plain, and how to traverse it in rapid pursuit and withdrawal.
These two will bring us safe to the city again, if once more
225 Zeus grants glory to Diomedes the son of Tydeus.
Come then, taking into your hands the goad and the glittering
reins, while I dismount from my chariot and carry the fighting;
or else yourself encounter this man, while I handle the horses.”

Then in answer the shining son of Lykaon spoke to him:“
230 Keep yourself, Aineias, the reins and your horses. These will
carry better the curved chariot under the driver
they know best, if we must give way before the son of Tydeus;
for fear they might go wild with terror and not be willing
to carry us out of the fighting, as they listen and long for your voice,
235 for fear the son of high-hearted Tydeus charging upon us
might kill us both and drive away the single-foot horses.
Rather drive yourself your own horses and your own chariot
while with my sharp spear I encounter this man as he comes on.”
They spoke so, and mounting the wrought chariot held
240 their fast-running horses against the son of Tydeus, in fury.
And Sthenelos the shining son of Kapaneus seeing them
swiftly uttered his winged words to the son of Tydeus:
“Son of Tydeus, you who delight my heart, Diomedes,
look, I see two mighty men furious to fight with you.
245 Their strength is enormous, one of them well skilled in the bow’s
work,
Pandaros, who claims his right as son of Lykaon,
and the other Aineias, who claims he was born as son to
Anchises the blameless, but his mother was Aphrodite.
Come then, let us give way with our horses; no longer storm on
250 so far among the champions, for fear you destroy your heart’s life.”
Then looking at him darkly strong Diomedes spoke to him:
“Argue me not toward flight, since I have no thought of obeying you.
No, for it would be ignoble for me to shrink back in the fighting
or to lurk aside, since my fighting strength stays steady forever.
255 I shrink indeed from mounting behind the horses, but as I am
now, I will face these. Pallas Athene will not let me run from them.
These two men, their fast-running horses shall never carry them
both back away from us, even though one man may escape us.
And put away in your thoughts this other thing I tell you.
260 If Athene of the many counsels should grant me the glory
to kill both, then do you check here these fast-running horses,

ours, tethering them with the reins tied to the chariot’s rail and
thereafter
remember to make a dash against the horses of Aineias,
and drive them away from the Trojans among the strong-greaved
Achaians.
265 These are of that strain which Zeus of the wide brows granted
once to Tros, recompense for his son Ganymedes, and therefore
are the finest of all horses beneath the sun and the daybreak;
and the lord of men Anchises stole horses from this breed,
without the knowledge of Laomedon putting mares under them.
270 From these there was bred for him a string of six in his great house.
Four of these, keeping them himself, he raised at his mangers,
but these two he gave to Aineias, two horses urgent of terror.
If we might only take these we should win ourselves excellent glory.”
Now as these were speaking things like this to each other,
275 the two came fast upon them driving their swift-running horses.
First to Diomedes called out the shining son of Lykaon:
“Valiant and strong-spirited, O son of proud Tydeus,
you were not beaten then by the bitter arrow, my swift shot.
Now I will try with the throwing-spear to see if I can hit you.”
280 So he spoke, and balanced the spear far-shadowed, and threw it,
and struck the son of Tydeus in the shield, and the flying
bronze spearhead was driven clean through and into the corselet,
and the shining son of Lykaon cried aloud in a great voice:
“Now are you struck clean through the middle, and I think that you will
not
285 hold up for much longer; you have given me great claim to glory.”
Then strong Diomedes answered, not frightened before him:
“You did not hit me, you missed, but I do not think that you two
will go free until one or the other of you has fallen
to glut with his blood Ares the god who fights under the shield’s
guard.”
290 He spoke, and threw; and Pallas Athene guided the weapon
to the nose next to the eye, and it cut on through the white teeth
and the bronze weariless shore all the way through the tongue’s base

so that the spearhead came out underneath the jawbone.
He dropped then from the chariot and his armor clattered upon him,
295 dazzling armor and shining, while those fast-running horses
shied away, and there his life and his strength were scattered.
But Aineias sprang to the ground with shield and with long spear,
for fear that somehow the Achaians might haul off the body,
and like a lion in the pride of his strength stood over him
300 holding before him the perfect circle of his shield and the spear
and raging to cut down any man who might come to face him,
crying a terrible cry. But Tydeus’ son in his hand caught
up a stone, a huge thing which no two men could carry
such as men are now, but by himself he lightly hefted it.
305 He threw, and caught Aineias in the hip, in the place where the hipbone
turns inside the thigh, the place men call the cup-socket.
It smashed the cup-socket and broke the tendons both sides of it,
and the rugged stone tore the skin backward, so that the fighter
dropping to one knee stayed leaning on the ground with his heavy
310 hand, and a covering of black night came over both eyes.
Now in this place Aineias lord of men might have perished
had not Aphrodite, Zeus’ daughter, been quick to perceive him,
his mother, who had borne him to Anchises the ox-herd;
and about her beloved son came streaming her white arms,
315 and with her white robe thrown in a fold in front she shielded him,
this keeping off the thrown weapons lest some fast-mounted Danaän
strike the bronze spear through his chest and strip the life from him.
She then carried her beloved son out of the fighting.
Nor did Sthenelos son of Kapaneus forget the commandments
320 that Diomedes of the great war cry had laid upon him,
but he held where they were their own single-foot horses
with their reins tied to the chariot rail, apart from the confusion,
and making a dash for the fluttering-maned horses of Aineias
drove them away from the Trojans among the strong-greaved Achaians,
325 and gave them to Deïpylos, his close friend, whom beyond all
others of his own age he prized, for their hearts were intimate,

to drive away to the hollow ships; meanwhile the warrior
mounted behind his own horses and caught up the shining
reins, and held the strong-footed team toward the son of Tydeus
330 headlong; and he swung the pitiless bronze at the lady of Kypros,
knowing her for a god without warcraft, not of those who,
goddesses, range in order the ranks of men in the fighting,
not Athene and not Enyo, sacker of cities.
Now as, following her through the thick crowd, he caught her,
335 lunging in his charge far forward the son of high-hearted
Tydeus made a thrust against the soft hand with the bronze spear,
and the spear tore the skin driven clean on through the immortal
robe that the very Graces had woven for her carefully,
over the palm’s base; and blood immortal flowed from the goddess,
340 ichor, that which runs in the veins of the blessed divinities;
since these eat no food, nor do they drink of the shining
wine, and therefore they have no blood and are called immortal.
She gave a great shriek and let fall her son she was carrying,
but Phoibos Apollo caught him up and away in his own hands,
345 in a dark mist, for fear that some fast-mounted Danaän
might strike the bronze spear through his chest and strip the life from
him.
But Diomedes of the great war cry shouted after her:
“Give way, daughter of Zeus, from the fighting and the terror. It is
not then enough that you lead astray women without warcraft?
350 Yet, if still you must haunt the fighting, I think that now you
will shiver even when you hear some other talking of battles.”
So he spoke, and the goddess departed in pain, hurt badly,
and Iris wind-footed took her by the hand and led her away
from the battle, her lovely skin blood-darkened, wounded and
suffering.
355 There to the left of the fighting she found Ares the violent
sitting, his spear leaned into the mist, and his swift horses.
Dropping on one knee before her beloved brother
in deep supplication she asked for his gold-bridled horses:
“Beloved brother, rescue me and give me your horses

360 so I may come to Olympos where is the place of the immortals.
I am in too much pain from the wound of a mortal’s spear-stroke,
Tydeus’ son’s, who would fight now even against Zeus father.”
So she spoke, and Ares gave her the gold-bridled horses,
and, still grieved in the inward heart, she mounted the chariot
365 and beside her entering Iris gathered the reins up
and whipped them into a run, and they winged their way unreluctant.
Now as they came to sheer Olympos, the place of the immortals,
there swift Iris the wind-footed reined in her horses
and slipped them from the yoke and threw fodder immortal before
them,
370 and now bright Aphrodite fell at the knees of her mother,
Dione, who gathered her daughter into the arms’ fold
and stroked her with her hand and called her by name and spoke to her:
“Who now of the Uranian gods, dear child, has done such
things to you, rashly, as if you were caught doing something wicked?”
375 Aphrodite the sweetly laughing spoke then and answered her:
“Tydeus’ son Diomedes, the too high-hearted, stabbed me
as I was carrying my own beloved son out of the fighting,
Aineias, who beyond all else in the world is dear to me;
so now this is no horrible war of Achaians and Trojans,
380 but the Danaäns are beginning to fight even with the immortals.”
Then Dione the shining among divinities answered her:
“Have patience, my child, and endure it, though you be saddened.
For many of us who have our homes on Olympos endure things
from men, when ourselves we inflict hard pain on each other.
385 Ares had to endure it when strong Ephialtes and Otos,
sons of Aloeus, chained him in bonds that were too strong for him,
and three months and ten he lay chained in the brazen cauldron;
and now might Ares, insatiable of fighting, have perished,
had not Eëriboia, their stepmother, the surpassingly lovely,
390 brought word to Hermes, who stole Ares away out of it
as he was growing faint and the hard bondage was breaking him.
Hera had to endure it when the strong son of Amphitryon
struck her beside the right breast with a tri-barbed arrow,
so that the pain he gave her could not be quieted. Hades

395 the gigantic had to endure with the rest the flying arrow
when this self-same man, the son of Zeus of the aegis,
struck him among the dead men at Pylos, and gave him to agony;
but he went up to the house of Zeus and to tall Olympos
heavy at heart, stabbed through and through with pain, for the arrow
400 was driven into his heavy shoulder, and his spirit was suffering.
But Paiëon, scattering medicines that still pain,
healed him, since he was not made to be one of the mortals.
Brute, heavy-handed, who thought nothing of the bad he was doing,
who with his archery hurt the gods that dwell on Olympos!
405 It was the goddess gray-eyed Athene who drove on this man
against you; poor fool, the heart of Tydeus’ son knows nothing
of how that man who fights the immortals lives for no long time,
his children do not gather to his knees to welcome their father
when he returns home after the fighting and the bitter warfare.
410 Then, though he be very strong indeed, let the son of Tydeus
take care lest someone even better than he might fight with him,
lest for a long time Aigialeia, wise child of Adrastos,
mourning wake out of sleep her household’s beloved companions,
longing for the best of the Achaians, her lord by marriage,
415 she, the strong wife of Diomedes, breaker of horses.”
She spoke, and with both hands stroked away from her arm the ichor,
so that the arm was made whole again and the strong pains rested.
But Hera and Athene glancing aside at her began
to tease the son of Kronos, Zeus, in words of mockery:
420 and the goddess gray-eyed Athene began the talk among them:
“Father Zeus, would you be angry with me if I said
something? It must be the lady of Kypros, moving some woman
of Achaia to follow after those Trojans she loves so hopelessly,
laying hold on the fair dresses of the Achaian women,
425 tore the tenderness of her hand on a golden pin’s point.”
So she spoke, and the father of gods and men smiled on her
and spoke to Aphrodite the golden, calling her to him:
“No, my child, not for you are the works of warfare. Rather
concern yourself only with the lovely secrets of marriage,
430 while all this shall be left to Athene and sudden Ares.”

Now as these were talking in this way with each other
Diomedes of the great war cry made for Aineias.
Though he saw how Apollo himself held his hands over him
he did not shrink even from the great god, but forever forward
435 drove, to kill Aineias and strip his glorious armor.
Three times, furious to cut him down, he drove forward,
and three times Apollo battered aside the bright shield,
but as a fourth time, like more than man, he charged, Apollo
who strikes from afar cried out to him in the voice of terror:
440 “Take care, give back, son of Tydeus, and strive no longer
to make yourself like the gods in mind, since never the same is
the breed of gods, who are immortal, and men who walk groundling.”
He spoke, and Tydeus’ son gave backward, only a little,
avoiding the anger of him who strikes from afar, Apollo,
445 who caught Aineias now away from the onslaught, and set him
in the sacred keep of Pergamos where was built his own temple.
There Artemis of the showering arrows and Leto within
the great and secret chamber healed his wound and cared for him.
But he of the silver bow, Apollo, fashioned an image
450 in the likeness of Aineias himself and in armor like him,
and all about this image brilliant Achaians and Trojans
hewed at each other, and at the ox-hide shields strong circled
guarding men’s chests, and at the fluttering straps of the guard-skins.
But Phoibos Apollo spoke now to violent Ares:
455 “Ares, Ares, manslaughtering, blood-stained, stormer of strong walls,
is there no way you can go and hold back this man from the fighting,
Tydeus’ son, who would now do battle against Zeus father?
Even now he stabbed in her hand by the wrist the lady
of Kypros, and again, like more than a man, charged even against me.”
460 So he spoke, and himself alighted on the peak of Pergamos
while stark Ares went down to stir the ranks of the Trojans,
in the likeness of the lord of the Thracians, swift-footed Akamas,
and urged onward the god-supported children of Priam:
“O you children of Priam, the king whom the gods love, how long
465 will you allow the Achaians to go on killing your people?
Until they fight beside the strong-builded gates? A man lies

fallen whom we honored as we honor Hektor the brilliant,
Aineias, who is son of great-hearted Anchises.
Come then, let us rescue our good companion from the carnage.”

470

So he spoke, and stirred the spirit and the strength in each man.
Then Sarpedon spoke in abuse to brilliant Hektor:
“Where now, Hektor, has gone that strength that was yours? You said
once
that without companions and without people you could hold this city
alone, with only your brothers and the lords of your sisters.
475 I can see not one of these men now, I know not where they are;
no, but they slink away like hounds who circle the lion,
while we, who are here as your companions, carry the fighting.
I have come, a companion to help you, from a very far place;
Lykia lies far away, by the whirling waters of Xanthos;
480 there I left behind my own wife and my baby son, there
I left my many possessions which the needy man eyes longingly.
Yet even so I drive on my Lykians, and myself have courage
to fight my man in battle, though there is nothing of mine here
that the Achaians can carry away as spoil or drive off.
485 But you: you stand here, not even giving the word to the rest
of your people to stand fast and fight in defense of their own wives.
Let not yourselves, caught as in the sweeping toils of the spun net,
be taken as war-spoil and plunder by the men who hate you,
men who presently will storm your strong-founded citadel.
490 All these things should lie night and day on your mind, forever,
supplication to the lords of your far-renowned companions,
to fight unwearying and hold off the strength of an insult.”
Sarpedon spoke, and his word bit into the heart of Hektor.
Straightway in all his armor he sprang to the ground from his chariot
495 and shaking two sharp spears ranged everywhere through the army
stirring men up to fight and waking the hateful warfare;
and these pulled themselves about and stood to face the Achaians,
while the Argives held in their close order and would not be broken.

As when along the hallowed threshing floors the wind scatters
500 chaff, among men winnowing, and fair-haired Demeter
in the leaning wind discriminates the chaff and the true grain
and the piling chaff whitens beneath it, so now the Achaians
turned white underneath the dust the feet of the horses
drove far into the brazen sky across their faces
505 as they rapidly closed and the charioteers wheeled back again.
They drove the strength of their hands straight on, as violent Ares
defending the Trojans mantled in dark night the battle
and passed everywhere, since he was carrying out the commandments
of Phoibos Apollo, him of the golden sword, who had bidden him
510 wake the heart in the Trojans as he saw that Pallas Athene
was gone away now, she who stood to defend the Danaäns.
And out of the rich secret chamber Apollo sent forth
Aineias, and dropped strength in the heart of the people’s shepherd.
So Aineias stood among his friends, who were happy
515 as they saw him coming back, still alive, and unwounded
and full of brave spirit; yet they asked him no question,
for the rest of their fighting work would not let them, that the silverbow god
woke, and manslaughtering Ares, and Hate, whose wrath is relentless.
Now the two Aiantes and Odysseus and Diomedes
520 stirred the Danaäns to fight these; since themselves they did not
fear the force of the men of Troy nor their charges onward,
but stayed where they were, like clouds, which the son of Kronos
stops in the windless weather on the heights of the towering mountains,
motionless, when the strength of the north wind sleeps, and the other
525 tearing winds, those winds that when they blow into tempests
high screaming descend upon the darkening clouds and scatter them.
So the Danaäns stood steady against the Trojans, nor gave way.
And Atreus’ son ranged through the masses with his many orders:
“Be men now, dear friends, and take up the heart of courage,
530 and have consideration for each other in the strong encounters,
since more come through alive when men consider each other,
and there is no glory when they give way, nor warcraft either.”

He spoke, and made a swift cast with his spear, and struck down a great
man
Deïkoön, companion of high-hearted Aineias,
535 Pergasos’ son, whom the Trojans honored as they honored Priam’s
children, since he was a swift man to fight in the foremost.
Powerful Agamemnon struck his shield with spear, nor
could the shield hold off the spear, but the bronze smashed clean
through
and was driven on through the belt to the deep of the belly.
He fell, thunderously, and his armor clattered upon him.
540 Now Aineias killed two great men of the Danaäns,
the sons of Diokles, Orsilochos and Krethon,
men whose father dwelt in Phere the strong-founded,
rich in substance, and his generation was of the river
Alpheios, who flows wide through the country of the Pylians,
545 and who got a son, Ortilochos, to be lord over many
men, but the son of Ortilochos was high-hearted Diokles;
and to Diokles in his turn were two twin sons born,
Orsilochos and Krethon, both well skilled in all fighting.
These two as they were grown to young manhood followed along with
550 the Argives in their black ships to Ilion, land of good horses,
winning honor for the sons of Atreus, Agamemnon
and Menelaos; now fulfillment of death was a darkness upon them.
These, as two young lions in the high places of the mountains,
had been raised by their mother in the dark of the deep forest,
555 lions which as they prey upon the cattle and the fat sheep
lay waste the steadings where there are men, until they also
fall and are killed under the cutting bronze in the men’s hands;
such were these two who beaten under the hands of Aineias
crashed now to the ground as if they were two tall pine trees.
560 As these fell warlike Menelaos took pity on them
and he strode out among the champions, helmed in bright bronze,
shaking his spear, and the fury of Ares drove him onward,
minded that he might go down under the hands of Aineias.
But Antilochos, son of high-hearted Nestor, watched him,

565 and he strode among the champions in fear for the shepherd of the
people,
lest he be hurt, and all their labor slip away into nothing.
So as Aineias and Menelaos raised hand and sharp spear
standing to face each other and furious to do battle,
Antilochos took his stand close beside the shepherd of the people.
570 Nor did Aineias hold his ground, though yet a swift fighter,
as he saw two men staying with each other against him.
These, when they had dragged back the bodies among the Achaian
people, dropped the poor youths into the hands of their company,
and themselves wheeled about once more to fight among the foremost.
575 There these killed Pylaimenes the equal of Ares,
lord of the Paphlagonian men in armor, high-hearted.
Menelaos the spear-famed, son of Atreus, stabbed him
with the spear as he stood his ground, and struck the collar-bone,
580 while Antilochos struck down Mydon, his charioteer and
henchman, Atymnios’ brave son, as he wheeled the single-foot
horses about, with a stone striking mid-elbow, and from his
hands the reins pale with ivory dropped in the dust groundling.
Antilochos charging drove the sword into his temple,
585 so that gasping he dropped from the carefully wrought chariot
headlong, driven deep in the dust his neck and shoulders;
and there, since he chanced to light in a depth of sand, he stuck fast
while his horses trampled him into the dust with their feet. These
Antilochos lashed and drove back into the host of the Achaians.
590 Hektor saw them across the ranks, and drove on against them
crying aloud, and with him followed the Trojan battalions
in their strength; and Ares led them with the goddess Enyo,
she carrying with her the turmoil of shameless hatred
while Ares made play in his hands with the spear gigantic
595 and ranged now in front of Hektor and now behind him.
Diomedes of the great war cry shivered as he saw him,
and like a man in his helplessness who, crossing a great plain,
stands at the edge of a fast-running river that dashes seaward,
and watches it thundering into white water, and leaps a pace backward,
600 so now Tydeus’ son gave back, and spoke to his people:

“Friends, although we know the wonder of glorious Hektor
to be a fighter with the spear and a bold man of battle,
yet there goes ever some god beside him, who beats off destruction,
and now, in the likeness of a man mortal, Ares goes with him.
605 Come then, keeping your faces turned to the Trojans, give ground
backward, nor be we eager to fight in strength with divinities.”
He spoke, and now the Trojans had come very close upon them.
There Hektor cut down two men, well skilled in warcraft,
Anchialos and Menesthes both in a single chariot.
610 As these fell great Telamonian Aias pitied them
and stood close in and made a cast with the shining javelin,
and struck Amphios, Selagos’ son, who rich in possessions
and rich in cornland had lived in Paisos, but his own destiny
brought him companion in arms to Priam and the children of Priam.
615 Now Telamonian Aias struck him beneath the war belt
and the far-shadowing spear was fixed in the lower belly,
and he fell, thunderously, and shining Aias ran forward
to strip his armor, but the Trojans showered spears upon him,
sharp spears and glittering, and the great shield caught many.
620 Setting his heel on the chest of the corpse he pulled out the brazen
spear, yet could no longer strip the rest of the glorious
armor from his shoulders, since he was battered with spears thrown,
and he dreaded the strong circle made by the haughty Trojans,
who many and valiant stood over him, gripping their great spears,
625 and though he was a mighty man and a strong and a proud one
thrust him away from them so that he gave ground backward
staggering.
So they went at their work all about the strong encounter.
But Herakles’ son Tlepolemos the huge and mighty
was driven by his strong destiny against godlike Sarpedon.
630 Now as these in their advance had come close together,
the own son, and the son’s son of Zeus cloud-gathering,
it was Tlepolemos of the two who spoke the first word:
“Man of counsel of the Lykians, Sarpedon, why must you

be skulking here, you who are a man unskilled in the fighting?
635 They are liars who call you issue of Zeus, the holder
of the aegis, since you fall far short in truth of the others
who were begotten of Zeus in the generations before us:
such men as, they say, was the great strength of Herakles,
my own father, of the daring spirit, the heart of a lion:
640 he came here on a time for the sake of Laomedon’s horses,
with six vessels only and the few men needed to man them,
and widowed the streets of Ilion and sacked the city;
but yours is the heart of a coward and your people are dying.
And I think that now, though you are come from Lykia, you will
645 bring no help to the Trojans even though you be a strong man,
but beaten down by my hands will pass through the gates of Hades.”
In turn the lord of the Lykians, Sarpedon, answered him:
“In truth, Tlepolemos, he did destroy Ilion the sacred
through the senselessness of one man, the haughty Laomedon,
650 who gave Herakles an evil word in return for good treatment
and would not give up the horses for whose sake he had come from far
off.
But I tell you, what you will win from me here will be death
and black destruction; and broken under my spear you will give me
glory, and give your soul to Hades of the famed horses.”
655 So spoke Sarpedon, while the other lifted his ash spear,
Tlepolemos; and in a single moment the long shafts
shot from their hands, Sarpedon striking him in the middle
of the throat, and the agonizing spear drove clean through
and over his eyes was mantled the covering mist of darkness.
660 But Tlepolemos in turn had struck Sarpedon with the long spear
in the left thigh, and the spear smashed on through in fury
scraping the bone, but his father fended destruction away from him.
But his brilliant companions carried godlike Sarpedon
out of the fighting, weighted down as he was by the long spear
665 which dragged, yet not one of them noticed nor took thought,
in their urgency, to pull out of his thigh the ash spear
so he might stand, such hard work did they have attending him.

On the other side the strong-greaved Achaians carried Tlepolemos
out of the fighting; but brilliant Odysseus, who held a hardy
670 spirit, saw what had happened, and his heart within was stirred up,
but now he pondered two ways within, in mind and in spirit,
whether first to go after the son of Zeus the loud-thundering
or whether he should strip the life from more of the Lykians.
Yet, as it was not the destiny of great-hearted Odysseus
675 to kill with sharp bronze the strong son of Zeus, therefore
Athene steered his anger against the host of the Lykians.
And there he killed Koiranos, and Chromios, and Alastor,
Halios and Alkandros, and Prytanis and Noëmon.
And now might brilliant Odysseus have killed yet more of the Lykians
680 had not tall Hektor of the shining helmet sharply perceived him,
who strode out among the champions helmed in the bright bronze
bringing terror to the Danaäns; but Zeus’ son, Sarpedon,
was glad as he saw him come up, and piteously bespoke him:
“Son of Priam, do not leave me lying for the Danaäns
685 to prey upon, but protect me, since otherwise in your city
my life must come to an end, since I could return no longer
back to my own house and the land of my fathers, bringing
joy to my own beloved wife and my son, still a baby.”
He spoke, but Hektor of the shining helm did not answer
but swept on past him in his eagerness with all speed
690 to push back the Argives and strip the life out of many.
Meanwhile his brilliant companions laid godlike Sarpedon
under a lovely spreading oak of Zeus of the aegis,
and strong Pelagon, one of his beloved companions,
pushed perforce through and out of his thigh the shaft of the ash spear.
695 And the mist mantled over his eyes, and the life left him,
but he got his breath back again, and the blast of the north wind
blowing brought back to life the spirit gasped out in agony.
But the Argives under the strength of Ares and bronze-armored
Hektor
did not ever turn their backs and make for their black ships
700 nor yet stand up to them in fighting, but always backward
gave way, as they saw how Ares went with the Trojans.

Who then was the first and who the last that they slaughtered,
Hektor, Priams’ son, and Ares the brazen? Godlike
Teuthras first, and next Orestes, driver of horses,
705 Trechos the spearman of Aitolia and Oinomaos,
Helenos son of Oinops and Oresbios of the shining
guard, who had lived in Hyle much concerned with his property
in a place hard on the Kephisian mere, and beside him other
men of Boiotia lived and held the fine fertile country.
710 Now as the goddess Hera of the white arms perceived how
the Argives were perishing in the strong encounter,
immediately she spoke to Pallas Athene her winged words:
“For shame, now, Atrytone, daughter of Zeus of the aegis:
nothing then meant the word we promised to Menelaos,
715 to go home after sacking the strong-walled city of Ilion,
if we are to let cursed Ares be so furious.
Come then, let us rather think of our own stark courage.”
So she spoke, nor did the goddess gray-eyed Athene
disobey her. But Hera, high goddess, daughter of Kronos
720 the mighty, went away to harness the gold-bridled horses.
Then Hebe in speed set about the chariot the curved wheels
eight-spoked and brazen, with an axle of iron both ways.
Golden is the wheel’s felly imperishable, and outside it
725 is joined, a wonder to look upon, the brazen running-rim,
and the silver naves revolve on either side of the chariot,
whereas the car itself is lashed fast with plaiting of gold
and silver, with double chariot rails that circle about it,
and the pole of the chariot is of silver, to whose extremity
730 Hebe made fast the golden and splendid yoke, and fastened
the harness, golden and splendid, and underneath the yoke Hera,
furious for hate and battle, led the swift-running horses.
Now in turn Athene, daughter of Zeus of the aegis,
beside the threshold of her father slipped off her elaborate
735 dress which she herself had wrought with her hands’ patience,
and now assuming the war tunic of Zeus who gathers
the clouds, she armed in her gear for the dismal fighting.
And across her shoulders she threw the betasseled, terrible

aegis, all about which Terror hangs like a garland,
740 and Hatred is there, and Battle Strength, and heart-freezing Onslaught
and thereon is set the head of the grim gigantic Gorgon,
a thing of fear and horror, portent of Zeus of the aegis.
Upon her head she set the golden helm with its four sheets
and two horns, wrought with the fighting men of a hundred cities.
745 She set her feet in the blazing chariot and took up a spear
heavy, huge, thick, wherewith she beats down the battalions of fighting
men, against whom she of mighty father is angered.
Hera laid the lash swiftly on the horses; and moving
of themselves groaned the gates of the sky that the Hours guarded,
750 those Hours to whose charge is given the huge sky and Olympos,
to open up the dense darkness or again to close it.
Through the way between they held the speed of their goaded horses.
They found the son of Kronos sitting apart from the other
gods, upon the highest peak of rugged Olympos.
755 There the goddess of the white arms, Hera, stopping her horses,
spoke to Zeus, high son of Kronos, and asked him a question:
“Father Zeus, are you not angry with Ares for his violent
acts, for killing so many and such good Achaian warriors
for no reason, and out of due order, to grieve me? And meanwhile
760 Kypris and Apollo of the silver bow take their ease and their pleasure
having let loose this maniac who knows nothing of justice.
Father Zeus, would you be angry with me if I were
to smite Ares with painful strokes and drive him out of the fighting?”
Then in turn the father of gods and men made answer:
“Go to it then, and set against him the spoiler Athene,
765 who beyond all others is the one to visit harsh pains upon him.”
So he spoke, nor did the goddess of the white arms, Hera,
disobey, but lashed on the horses, and they winged their way
unreluctant
through the space between the earth and the starry heaven.
As far as into the hazing distance a man can see with
770 his eyes, who sits in his aerie gazing on the wine-blue water,
as far as this is the stride of the gods’ proud neighing horses.
Now as they came to Troy land and the two running rivers

where Simoeis and Skamandros dash their waters together,
there the goddess of the white arms, Hera, stayed her horses,
775 slipping them from the chariot, and drifting close mist about them,
and Simoeis grew as grass ambrosia for them to graze on.
Now these two walked forward in little steps like shivering
doves, in their eagerness to stand by the men of Argos,
780 after they had come to the place where the most and the bravest
stood close huddled about the great strength of the breaker of horses,
Diomedes; in the likeness of lions who rend their meat raw,
or wild pigs, boars, in whom the strength diminishes never,
there standing the goddess of the white arms, Hera, shouted,
likening herself to high-hearted, bronze-voiced Stentor,
785 who could cry out in as great a voice as fifty other men:
““Shame, you Argives, poor nonentities splendid to look on.
In those days when brilliant Achilleus came into the fighting,
never would the Trojans venture beyond the Dardanian
gates, so much did they dread the heavy spear of that man.
790 Now they fight by the hollow ships and far from the city.”
So she spoke, and stirred the spirit and strength in each man.
But the goddess gray-eyed Athene made straight for Tydeus’
son, and found the king standing by his horses and chariot,
cooling the wound that Pandaros made with the cast of his arrow.
795 For the sweat made him sore underneath the broad strap of the circled
shield; this made him sore, and his arm was tired. He held up
the shield-strap, and wiped the dark blot of blood away from it.
The goddess laid hold of the harnessed horses and spoke to him:
800 “Tydeus got him a son who is little enough like him,
since Tydeus was a small man for stature, but he was a fighter.
Even on that time when I would not consent to his fighting
nor drawing men’s eyes, when he went by himself without the
Achaians
as a messenger to Thebe among all the Kadmeians,
805 then I invited him to feast at his ease in their great halls;
even so, keeping that heart of strength that was always within him

he challenged the young men of the Kadmeians, and defeated all of
them
easily; such a helper was I who stood then beside him.
Now beside you also I stand and ever watch over you,
810 and urge you to fight confidently with the Trojans. And yet
the weariness has entered your limbs from many encounters,
or else it is some poor-spirited fear that holds you. If so,
you are no issue then of the son of wise Oineus, Tydeus.”
Then in answer powerful Diomedes spoke to her:
815 “Daughter of Zeus who holds the aegis, goddess, I know you,
and therefore will speak confidently to you, and hide nothing.
It is no poor-spirited fear nor shrinking that holds me.
Rather I remember the orders you yourself gave me
when you would not let me fight in the face of the blessed immortals—
the
820 rest of them, except only if Aphrodite, Zeus’ daughter,
went into the fighting, I might stab at her with the sharp bronze.
Therefore now have I myself given way, and I ordered
the rest of the Argives all to be gathered in this place beside me,
since I see that this who is lord of the fighting is Ares.”
825 Then in turn the goddess gray-eyed Athene answered him:
“Son of Tydeus, you who delight my heart, Diomedes,
no longer be thus afraid of Ares, nor of any other
immortal; such a helper shall I be standing beside you.
Come then, first against Ares steer your single-foot horses,
830 and strike him from close. Be not afraid of violent Ares,
that thing of fury, evil-wrought, that double-faced liar
who even now protested to Hera and me, promising
that he would fight against the Trojans and stand by the Argives.
Now, all promises forgotten, he stands by the Trojans.”
835 So speaking she pushed Sthenelos to the ground from the chariot,
driving him back with her hand, and he leapt away from it lightly,
and she herself, a goddess in her anger, stepped into the chariot
beside brilliant Diomedes, and the oaken axle groaned aloud
under the weight, carrying a dread goddess and a great man.
840 Pallas Athene then took up the whip and the reins, steering

first of all straight on against Ares the single-foot horses.
Ares was in the act of stripping gigantic Periphas,
shining son of Ochesios, far the best of the men of Aitolia.
Blood-stained Ares was in the act of stripping him. But Athene
845 put on the helm of Death, that stark Ares might not discern her.
Now as manslaughtering Ares caught sight of Diomedes
the brilliant, he let gigantic Periphas lie in the place where
he had first cut him down and taken the life away from him,
and made straight against Diomedes, breaker of horses.
850 Now as they in their advance had come close together,
Ares lunged first over the yoke and the reins of his horses
with the bronze spear, furious to take the life from him.
But the goddess gray-eyed Athene in her hand catching
the spear pushed it away from the car, so he missed and stabbed vainly.
855 After him Diomedes of the great war cry drove forward
with the bronze spear; and Pallas Athene, leaning in on it,
drove it into the depth of the belly where the war belt girt him.
Picking this place she stabbed and driving it deep in the fair flesh
wrenched the spear out again. Then Ares the brazen bellowed
860 with a sound as great as nine thousand men make, or ten thousand,
when they cry as they carry into the fighting the fury of the war god.
And a shivering seized hold alike on Achaians and Trojans
in their fear at the bellowing of battle-insatiate Ares.
As when out of the thunderhead the air shows darkening
865 after a day’s heat when the stormy wind uprises,
thus to Tydeus’ son Diomedes Ares the brazen
showed as he went up with the clouds into the wide heaven.
Lightly he came to the gods’ citadel, headlong Olympos,
and sat down beside Kronian Zeus, grieving in his spirit,
870 and showed him the immortal blood dripping from the spear cut.
So in sorrow for himself he addressed him in winged words:
“Father Zeus, are you not angry looking on these acts of violence?
We who are gods forever have to endure the most horrible
hurts, by each other’s hatred, as we try to give favor to mortals.
875 It is your fault we fight, since you brought forth this maniac daughter
accursed, whose mind is fixed forever on unjust action.

For all the rest, as many as are gods on Olympos,
are obedient to you, and we all have rendered ourselves submissive.
Yet you say nothing and you do nothing to check this girl, letting
880 her go free, since yourself you begot this child of perdition.
See now, the son of Tydeus, Diomedes the haughty,
she has egged on to lash out in fury against the immortal
gods. First he stabbed the Kyprian in the arm by the wrist. Then
like something more than human he swept on even against me.
885 But my swift feet took me out of the way. Otherwise I should
long be lying there in pain among the stark dead men,
or go living without strength because of the strokes of the bronze
spear.”
Then looking at him darkly Zeus who gathers the clouds spoke to
him:
“Do not sit beside me and whine, you double-faced liar.
890 To me you are most hateful of all gods who hold Olympos.
Forever quarreling is dear to your heart, wars and battles.
Truly the anger of Hera your mother is grown out of all hand
nor gives ground; and try as I may I am broken by her arguments,
and it is by her impulse, I think, you are suffering all this.
895 And yet I will not long endure to see you in pain, since
you are my child, and it was to me that your mother bore you.
But were you born of some other god and proved so ruinous
long since you would have been dropped beneath the gods of the bright
sky.”
So he spoke, and told Paiëon to heal him; and scattering
900 medicines to still pain upon him Paiëon rendered him
well again, since he was not made to be one of the mortals.
As when the juice of the fig in white milk rapidly fixes
that which was fluid before and curdles quickly for one who
stirs it; in such speed as this he healed violent Ares;
905 and Hebe washed him clean and put delicate clothing upon him.
And rejoicing in the glory of his strength he sat down beside Kronion.
Meanwhile, the two went back again to the house of great Zeus,
Hera of Argos, with Athene who stands by her people,
after they stopped the murderous work of manslaughtering Ares.

BOOK SIX

5

10

15

20

25

So the grim encounter of Achaians and Trojans was left
to itself, and the battle veered greatly now one way, now in another,
over the plain as they guided their bronze spears at each other
in the space between the waters of Xanthos and Simoeis.
First Telamonian Aias, that bastion of the Achaians,
broke the Trojan battalions and brought light to his own company,
striking down the man who was far the best of the Thracians,
Akamas, the huge and mighty, the son of Eussoros.
Throwing first, he struck the horn of the horse-haired helmet
and the bronze spear-point fixed in his forehead and drove inward
through the bone; and a mist of darkness clouded both eyes.
Diomedes of the great war cry cut down Axylos,
Teuthras’ son, who had been a dweller in strong-founded Arisbe,
a man rich in substance and a friend to all humanity
since in his house by the wayside he entertained all comers.
Yet there was none of these now to stand before him and keep off
the sad destruction, and Diomedes stripped life from both of them,
Axylos and his henchman Kalesios, who was the driver
guiding his horses; so down to the underworld went both men.
Now Euryalos slaughtered Opheltios and Dresos,
and went in pursuit of Aisepos and Pedasos, those whom the naiad
nymph Abarbare had borne to blameless Boukolion.
Boukolion himself was the son of haughty Laomedon,
eldest born, but his mother conceived him in darkness and secrecy.
While shepherding his flocks he lay with the nymph and loved her,
and she conceiving bore him twin boys. But now Mekistios’
son unstrung the strength of these and the limbs in their glory,
Euryalos, and stripped the armor away from their shoulders.

Polypoites the stubborn in battle cut down Astyalos,
30 while Odysseus slaughtered one from Perkote, Pidytes,
with the bronze spear, and great Aretaon was killed by Teukros.
Nestor’s son Antilochos with the shining shaft killed
Ableros; the lord of men, Agamemnon, brought death to Elatos,
whose home had been on the shores of Satnioeis’ lovely waters,
35 sheer Pedasos. And Leïtos the fighter caught Phylakos
as he ran away; and Eurypylos made an end of Melanthios.

40

45

50

55

60

Now Menelaos of the great war cry captured Adrestos
alive; for his two horses bolting over the level land
got entangled in a tamarisk growth, and shattered the curving
chariot at the tip of the pole; so they broken free went
on toward the city, where many beside stampeded in terror.
So Adrestos was whirled beside the wheel from the chariot
headlong into the dust on his face; and the son of Atreus,
Menelaos, with the far-shadowed spear in his hand, stood over him.
But Adrestos, catching him by the knees, supplicated:
“Take me alive, son of Atreus, and take appropriate ransom.
In my rich father’s house the treasures lie piled in abundance;
bronze is there, and gold, and difficultly wrought iron,
and my father would make you glad with abundant repayment
were he to hear that I am alive by the ships of the Achaians.”
So he spoke, and moved the spirit inside Menelaos.
And now he was on the point of handing him to a henchman
to lead back to the fast Achaian ships; but Agamemnon
came on the run to join him and spoke his word of argument:
“Dear brother, O Menelaos, are you concerned so tenderly
with these people? Did you in your house get the best of treatment
from the Trojans? No, let not one of them go free of sudden
death and our hands; not the young man child that the mother carries
still in her body, not even he, but let all of Ilion’s
people perish, utterly blotted out and unmourned for.”
The hero spoke like this, and bent the heart of his brother
since he urged justice. Menelaos shoved with his hand Adrestos
the warrior back from him, and powerful Agamemnon

stabbed him in the side and, as he writhed over, Atreides,
65 setting his heel upon the midriff, wrenched out the ash spear.

70

75

80

85

90

95

Nestor in a great voice cried out to the men of Argos:
“O beloved Danaän fighters, henchmen of Ares,
let no man anymore hang back with his eye on the plunder
designing to take all the spoil he can gather back to the vessels;
let us kill the men now, and afterward at your leisure
all along the plain you can plunder the perished corpses.”
So he spoke, and stirred the spirit and strength in each man.
Then once more would the Trojans have climbed back into Ilion’s
wall, subdued by terror before the warlike Achaians,
had not Priam’s son, Helenos, best by far of the augurs,
stood beside Aineias and Hektor and spoken a word to them:
“Hektor and Aineias, on you beyond others is leaning
the battle-work of Trojans and Lykians, since you are our greatest
in every course we take, whether it be in thought or in fighting:
stand your ground here; visit your people everywhere; hold them
fast by the gates, before they tumble into their women’s
arms, and become to our enemies a thing to take joy in.
Afterward, when you have set all the battalions in motion,
the rest of us will stand fast here and fight with the Danaäns
though we are very hard hit indeed; necessity forces us;
but you, Hektor, go back again to the city, and there tell
your mother and mine to assemble all the ladies of honor
at the temple of gray-eyed Athene high on the citadel;
there opening with a key the door to the sacred chamber
let her take a robe, which seems to her the largest and loveliest
in the great house, and that which is far her dearest possession,
and lay it along the knees of Athene the lovely haired. Let her
promise to dedicate within the shrine twelve heifers,
yearlings, never broken, if only she will have pity
on the town of Troy, and the Trojan wives, and their innocent children.
So she might hold back from sacred Ilion the son of Tydeus,

that wild spear-fighter, the strong one who drives men to thoughts of
terror,
who I say now is become the strongest of all the Achaians.
For never did we so fear Achilleus even, that leader
100 of men, who they say was born of a goddess. This man has gone clean
berserk, so that no one can match his warcraft against him.”
So he spoke, and Hektor did not disobey his brother,
but at once in all his armor leapt to the ground from his chariot
and shaking two sharp spears in his hands ranged over the whole host
105 stirring them up to fight and waking the ghastly warfare.
So they whirled about and stood their ground against the Achaians,
and the Argives gave way backward and stopped their slaughtering,
and thought some one of the immortals must have descended
from the starry sky to stand by the Trojans, the way they rallied.
110 But Hektor lifted his voice and cried aloud to the Trojans:
“You high-hearted Trojans and far-renowned companions,
be men now, dear friends, and remember your furious valor
until I can go back again to Ilion, and there tell
the elder men who sit as counselors, and our own wives,
115 to make their prayer to the immortals and promise them hecatombs.”
So spoke Hektor of the shining helm, and departed;
and against his ankles as against his neck clashed the dark ox-hide,
the rim running round the edge of the great shield massive in the
middle.
Now Glaukos, sprung of Hippolochos, and the son of Tydeus
120 came together in the space between the two armies, battle-bent.
Now as these advancing came to one place and encountered,
first to speak was Diomedes of the great war cry:
“Who among mortal men are you, good friend?
Since never before have I seen you in the fighting where men win
glory,
125 yet now you have come striding far out in front of all others
in your great heart, who have dared stand up to my spear farshadowing.
Yet unhappy are those whose sons match warcraft against me.

But if you are some one of the immortals come down from the bright
sky,
know that I will not fight against any god of the heaven,
130 since even the son of Dryas, Lykourgos the powerful, did not
live long; he who tried to fight with the gods of the bright sky,
who once drove the fosterers of rapturous Dionysos
headlong down the sacred Nyseian hill, and all of them
shed and scattered their wands on the ground, stricken with an ox-goad
135 by murderous Lykourgos, while Dionysos in terror
dived into the salt surf, and Thetis took him to her bosom,
frightened, with the strong shivers upon him at the man’s blustering.
But the gods who live at their ease were angered with Lykourgos,
and the son of Kronos struck him to blindness, nor did he live long
140 afterward, since he was hated by all the immortals.
Therefore neither would I be willing to fight with the blessed
gods; but if you are one of those mortals who eat what the soil yields,
come nearer, so that sooner you may reach your appointed destruction.”
Then in turn the shining son of Hippolochos answered:
145 “High-hearted son of Tydeus, why ask of my generation?
As is the generation of leaves, so is that of humanity.
The wind scatters the leaves on the ground, but the live timber
burgeons with leaves again in the season of spring returning.
So one generation of men will grow while another
150 dies. Yet if you wish to learn all this and be certain
of my genealogy: there are plenty of men who know it.
There is a city, Ephyrē, in the corner of horse-pasturing
Argos; there lived Sisyphos, that sharpest of all men,
Sisyphos, Aiolos’ son, and he had a son named Glaukos,
155 and Glaukos in turn sired Bellerophontes the blameless.
To Bellerophontes the gods granted beauty and desirable
manhood; but Proitos in anger devised evil things against him,
and drove him out of his own domain, since he was far greater,
from the Argive country Zeus had broken to the sway of his scepter.
160 Beautiful Anteia the wife of Proitos was stricken
with passion to lie in love with him, and yet she could not
beguile valiant Bellerophontes, whose will was virtuous.

So she went to Proitos the king and uttered her falsehood:
‘Would you be killed, O Proitos? Then murder Bellerophontes
165 who tried to lie with me in love, though I was unwilling’.
So she spoke, and anger took hold of the king at her story.
He shrank from killing him, since his heart was awed by such action,
but sent him away to Lykia, and handed him murderous symbols,
which he inscribed in a folding tablet, enough to destroy life,
170 and told him to show it to his wife’s father, that he might perish.
Bellerophontes went to Lykia in the blameless convoy
of the gods; when he came to the running stream of Xanthos, and
Lykia,
the lord of wide Lykia tendered him full-hearted honor.
Nine days he entertained him with sacrifice of nine oxen,
175 but afterward when the rose fingers of the tenth dawn showed, then
he began to question him, and asked to be shown the symbols,
whatever he might be carrying from his son-in-law’, Proitos.
Then after he had been given his son-in-laws wicked symbols
first he sent him away with orders to kill the Chimaira
180 none might approach; a thing of immortal make, not human,
lion-fronted and snake behind, a goat in the middle,
and snorting out the breath of the terrible flame of bright fire.
He killed the Chimaira, obeying the portents of the immortals.
Next after this he fought against the glorious Solymoi,
185 and this he thought was the strongest battle with men that he entered;
but third he slaughtered the Amazons, who fight men in battle.
Now as he came back the king spun another entangling
treachery; for choosing the bravest men in wide Lykia
he laid a trap, but these men never came home thereafter
190 since all of them were killed by blameless Bellerophontes.
Then when the king knew him for the powerful stock of the god,
he detained him there, and offered him the hand of his daughter,
and gave him half of all the kingly privilege. Thereto
the men of Lykia cut out a piece of land, surpassing
195 all others, fine ploughland and orchard for him to administer.
His bride bore three children to valiant Bellerophontes,
Isandros and Hippolochos and Laodameia.

Laodameia lay in love beside Zeus of the counsels
and bore him godlike Sarpedon of the brazen helmet.
200 But after Bellerophontes was hated by all the immortals,
he wandered alone about the plain of Aleios, eating
his heart out, skulking aside from the trodden track of humanity.
As for Isandros his son, Ares the insatiate of fighting
killed him in close battle against the glorious Solymoi,
205 while Artemis of the golden reins killed the daughter in anger.
But Hippolochos begot me, and I claim that he is my father;
he sent me to Troy, and urged upon me repeated injunctions,
to be always among the bravest, and hold my head above others,
not shaming the generation of my fathers, who were
210 the greatest men in Ephyrē and again in wide Lykia.
Such is my generation and the blood I claim to be born from.”
He spoke, and Diomedes of the great war cry was gladdened.
He drove his spear deep into the prospering earth, and in winning
words of friendliness he spoke to the shepherd of the people:
215 “See now, you are my guest friend from far in the time of our fathers.
Brilliant Oineus once was host to Bellerophontes
the blameless, in his halls, and twenty days he detained him,
and these two gave to each other fine gifts in token of friendship.
Oineus gave his guest a war belt bright with the red dye,
220 Bellerophontes a golden and double-handled drinking-cup,
a thing I left behind in my house when I came on my journey.
Tydeus, though, I cannot remember, since I was little
when he left me, that time the people of the Achaians perished
in Thebe. Therefore I am your friend and host in the heart of Argos;
225 you are mine in Lykia, when I come to your country.
Let us avoid each other’s spears, even in the close fighting.
There are plenty of Trojans and famed companions in battle for me
to kill, whom the god sends me, or those I run down with my swift feet,
many Achaians for you to slaughter, if you can do it.
230 But let us exchange our armor, so that these others may know
how we claim to be guests and friends from the days of our fathers.”
So they spoke, and both springing down from behind their horses
gripped each other’s hands and exchanged the promise of friendship;

but Zeus the son of Kronos stole away the wits of Glaukos
235 who exchanged with Diomedes the son of Tydeus armor
of gold for bronze, for nine oxen’s worth the worth of a hundred.
Now as Hektor had come to the Skaian gates and the oak tree,
all the wives of the Trojans and their daughters came running about
him
to ask after their sons, after their brothers and neighbors,
240 their husbands; and he told them to pray to the immortals,
all, in turn; but there were sorrows in store for many.
Now he entered the wonderfully built palace of Priam.
This was fashioned with smooth-stone cloister walks, and within it
were embodied fifty sleeping chambers of smoothed stone
245 built so as to connect with each other; and within these slept
each beside his own wedded wife, the sons of Priam.
In the same inner court on the opposite side, to face these,
lay the twelve close smooth-stone sleeping chambers of his daughters
built so as to connect with each other; and within these slept,
250 each by his own modest wife, the lords of the daughters of Priam.
There, there came to meet Hektor his bountiful mother
with Laodikē, the loveliest looking of all her daughters.
She clung to his hand and called him by name and spoke to him: “Why
then,
child, have you come here and left behind the bold battle?
255 Surely it is these accursed sons of the Achaians who wear you
out, as they fight close to the city, and the spirit stirred you
to return, and from the peak of the citadel lift your hands, praying
to Zeus. But stay while I bring you honey-sweet wine, to pour out
a libation to father Zeus and the other immortals
260 first, and afterward if you will drink yourself, be strengthened.
In a tired man, wine will bring back his strength to its bigness,
in a man tired as you are tired, defending your neighbors.”
Tall Hektor of the shining helm spoke to her answering:
“My honored mother, lift not to me the kindly sweet wine,
265 for fear you stagger my strength and make me forget my courage;
and with hands unwashed I would take shame to pour the glittering

wine to Zeus; there is no means for a man to pray to the dark-misted
son of Kronos, with blood and muck all spattered upon him.
But go yourself to the temple of the spoiler Athene,
270 assembling the ladies of honor, and with things to be sacrificed,
and take a robe, which seems to you the largest and loveliest
in the great house, and that which is far your dearest possession.
Lay this along the knees of Athene the lovely haired. Also
promise to dedicate within the shrine twelve heifers,
275 yearlings, never broken, if only she will have pity
on the town of Troy, and the Trojan wives, and their innocent children,
if she will hold back from sacred Ilion the son of Tydeus,
that wild spear-fighter, the strong one who drives men to thoughts of
terror.
So go yourself to the temple of the spoiler Athene,
280 while I go in search of Paris, to call him, if he will listen
to anything I tell him. How I wish at this moment the earth might
open beneath him. The Olympian let him live, a great sorrow
to the Trojans, and high-hearted Priam, and all of his children.
If only I could see him gone down to the house of the death god,
285 then I could say my heart had forgotten its joyless affliction.”
So he spoke, and she going into the great house called out
to her handmaidens, who assembled throughout the city the highborn
women; while she descended into the fragrant store-chamber.
There lay the elaborately wrought robes, the work of Sidonian
290 women, whom Alexandros himself, the godlike, had brought home
from the land of Sidon, crossing the wide sea, on that journey
when he brought back also gloriously descended Helen.
Hekabē lifted out one and took it as gift to Athene,
that which was the loveliest in design and the largest,
295 and shone like a star. It lay beneath the others. She went on
her way, and a throng of noble women hastened about her.
When these had come to Athene’s temple on the peak of the citadel,
Theano of the fair cheeks opened the door for them, daughter
of Kisseus, and wife of Antenor, breaker of horses,
300 she whom the Trojans had established to be Athene’s priestess.

With a wailing cry all lifted up their hands to Athene,
and Theano of the fair cheeks taking up the robe laid it
along the knees of Athene the lovely haired, and praying
she supplicated the daughter of powerful Zeus: “O lady,
305 Athene, our city’s defender, shining among goddesses:
break the spear of Diomedes, and grant that the man be
hurled on his face in front of the Skaian gates; so may we
instantly dedicate within your shrine twelve heifers,
yearlings, never broken, if only you will have pity
310 on the town of Troy, and the Trojan wives, and their innocent
children.”
She spoke in prayer, but Pallas Athene turned her head from her.
So they made their prayer to the daughter of Zeus the powerful.
But Hektor went away to the house of Alexandros,
a splendid place he had built himself, with the men who at that time
315 were the best men for craft smanship in the generous Troad,
who had made him a sleeping room and a hall and a courtyard
near the houses of Hektor and Priam, on the peak of the citadel.
There entered Hektor beloved of Zeus, in his hand holding
the eleven-cubit-long spear, whose shaft was tipped with a shining
320 bronze spearhead, and a ring of gold was hooped to hold it.
He found the man in his chamber busy with his splendid armor,
the corselet and the shield, and turning in his hands the curved bow,
while Helen of Argos was sitting among her attendant women
directing the magnificent work done by her handmaidens.
325 But Hektor saw him, and in words of shame he rebuked him:
“Strange man! It is not fair to keep in your heart this coldness.
The people are dying around the city and around the steep wall
as they fight hard; and it is for you that this war with its clamor
has flared up about our city. You yourself would fight with another
330 whom you saw anywhere hanging back from the hateful encounter.
Up then, to keep our town from burning at once in the hot fire.”
Then in answer the godlike Alexandros spoke to him:
“Hektor, seeing you have scolded me rightly, not beyond measure,
therefore I will tell, and you in turn understand and listen.

335 It was not so much in coldness and bitter will toward the Trojans
that I sat in my room, but I wished to give myself over to sorrow.
But just now with soft words my wife was winning me over
and urging me into the fight, and that way seems to me also
the better one. Victory passes back and forth between men.
340 Come then, wait for me now while I put on my armor of battle,
or go, and I will follow, and I think I can overtake you.”
He spoke, but Hektor of the shining helm gave him no answer,
but Helen spoke to him in words of endearment: “Brother
by marriage to me, who am a nasty bitch evil-intriguing,
345 how I wish that on that day when my mother first bore me
the foul whirlwind of the storm had caught me away and swept me
to the mountain, or into the wash of the sea deep-thundering
where the waves would have swept me away before all these things had
happened.
Yet since the gods had brought it about that these vile things must be,
350 I wish I had been the wife of a better man than this is,
one who knew modesty and all things of shame that men say.
But this man’s heart is no steadfast thing, nor yet will it be so
ever hereafter; for that I think he shall take the consequence.
But come now, come in and rest on this chair, my brother,
355 since it is on your heart beyond all that the hard work has fallen
for the sake of dishonored me and the blind act of Alexandros,
us two, on whom Zeus set a vile destiny, so that hereafter
we shall be made into things of song for the men of the future.”
Then tall Hektor of the shining helm answered her: “Do not, Helen,
360 make me sit with you, though you love me. You will not persuade me.
Already my heart within is hastening me to defend
the Trojans, who when I am away long greatly to have me.
Rather rouse this man, and let himself also be swift to action
so he may overtake me while I am still in the city.
365 For I am going first to my own house, so I can visit
my own people, my beloved wife and my son, who is little,
since I do not know if ever again I shall come back this way,
or whether the gods will strike me down at the hands of the Achaians.”

So speaking Hektor of the shining helm departed
370 and in speed made his way to his own well-established dwelling,
but failed to find in the house Andromachē of the white arms;
for she, with the child, and followed by one fair-robed attendant,
had taken her place on the tower in lamentation, and tearful.
When he saw no sign of his perfect wife within the house, Hektor
375 stopped in his way on the threshold and spoke among the
handmaidens:
“Come then, tell me truthfully as you may, handmaidens:
where has Andromachē of the white arms gone?
Is she with any of the sisters of her lord or the wives of his brothers?
Or has she gone to the house of Athene, where all the other
380 lovely-haired women of Troy propitiate the grim goddess?”
Then in turn the hard-working housekeeper gave him an answer:
“Hektor, since you have urged me to tell you the truth, she is not
with any of the sisters of her lord or the wives of his brothers,
nor has she gone to the house of Athene, where all the other
385 lovely-haired women of Troy propitiate the grim goddess,
but she has gone to the great bastion of Ilion, because she heard that
the Trojans were losing, and great grew the strength of the Achaians.
Therefore she has gone in speed to the wall, like a woman
gone mad, and a nurse attending her carries the baby.”
390 So the housekeeper spoke, and Hektor hastened from his home
backward by the way he had come through the well-laid streets. So
as he had come to the gates on his way through the great city,
the Skaian gates, whereby he would issue into the plain, there
at last his own generous wife came running to meet him,
395 Andromachē, the daughter of high-hearted Eëtion;
Eëtion, who had dwelt underneath wooded Plakos,
in Thebe below Plakos, lord over the Kilikian people.
It was his daughter who was given to Hektor of the bronze helm.
She came to him there, and beside her went an attendant carrying
400 the boy in the fold of her bosom, a little child, only a baby,
Hektor’s son, the admired, beautiful as a star shining,
whom Hektor called Skamandrios, but all of the others
Astyanax—lord of the city; since Hektor alone saved Ilion.

Hektor smiled in silence as he looked on his son, but she,
405 Andromachē, stood close beside him, letting her tears fall,
and clung to his hand and called him by name and spoke to him:
“Dearest,
your own great strength will be your death, and you have no pity
on your little son, nor on me, ill-starred, who soon must be your
widow;
for presently the Achaians, gathering together,
410 will set upon you and kill you; and for me it would be far better
to sink into the earth when I have lost you, for there is no other
consolation for me after you have gone to your destiny—only
grief; since I have no father, no honored mother.
It was brilliant Achilleus who slew my father, Eëtion,
415 when he stormed the strong-founded citadel of the Kilikians,
Thebe of the towering gates. He killed Eëtion
but did not strip his armor, for his heart respected the dead man,
but burned the body in all its elaborate war-gear
and piled a grave mound over it, and the nymphs of the mountains,
420 daughters of Zeus of the aegis, planted elm trees about it.
And they who were my seven brothers in the great house all went
upon a single day down into the house of the death god,
for swift-footed brilliant Achilleus slaughtered all of them
as they were tending their white sheep and their lumbering oxen;
425 and when he had led my mother, who was queen under wooded
Plakos,
here, along with all his other possessions, Achilleus
released her again, accepting ransom beyond count, but Artemis
of the showering arrows struck her down in the halls of her father.
Hektor, thus you are father to me, and my honored mother,
430 you are my brother, and you it is who are my young husband.
Please take pity upon me then, stay here on the rampart,
that you may not leave your child an orphan, your wife a widow,
but draw your people up by the fig tree, there where the city
is openest to attack, and where the wall may be mounted.
435 Three times their bravest came that way, and fought there to storm it
about the two Aiantes and renowned Idomeneus,

about the two Atreidai and the fighting son of Tydeus.
Either some man well skilled in prophetic arts had spoken,
or the very spirit within themselves had stirred them to the onslaught.”
440 Then tall Hektor of the shining helm answered her: “All these
things are in my mind also, lady; yet I would feel deep shame
before the Trojans, and the Trojan women with trailing garments,
if like a coward I were to shrink aside from the fighting;
and the spirit will not let me, since I have learned to be valiant
445 and to fight always among the foremost ranks of the Trojans,
winning for my own self great glory, and for my father.
For I know this thing well in my heart, and my mind knows it:
there will come a day when sacred Ilion shall perish,
and Priam, and the people of Priam of the strong ash spear.
450 But it is not so much the pain to come of the Trojans
that troubles me, not even of Priam the king nor Hekabē,
not the thought of my brothers who in their numbers and valor
shall drop in the dust under the hands of men who hate them,
as troubles me the thought of you, when some bronze-armored
455 Achaian leads you off, taking away your day of liberty,
in tears; and in Argos you must work at the loom of another,
and carry water from the spring Messeis or Hypereia,
all unwilling, but strong will be the necessity upon you;
and some day seeing you shedding tears a man will say of you:
460 ‘This is the wife of Hektor, who was ever the bravest fighter
of the Trojans, breakers of horses, in the days when they fought about
Ilion.
’ So will one speak of you; and for you it will be yet a fresh grief,
to be widowed of such a man who could fight off the day of your
slavery.
But may I be dead and the piled earth hide me under before I
465 hear you crying and know by this that they drag you captive.”
So speaking glorious Hektor held out his arms to his baby,
who shrank back to his fair-girdled nurse’s bosom
screaming, and frightened at the aspect of his own father,
terrified as he saw the bronze and the crest with its horse-hair,

470 nodding dreadfully, as he thought, from the peak of the helmet.
Then his beloved father laughed out, and his honored mother,
and at once glorious Hektor lifted from his head the helmet
and laid it in all its shining upon the ground. Then taking
up his dear son he tossed him about in his arms, and kissed him,
475 and lifted his voice in prayer to Zeus and the other immortals:
“Zeus, and you other immortals, grant that this boy, who is my son,
may be as I am, pre-eminent among the Trojans,
great in strength, as am I, and rule strongly over Ilion;
and some day let them say of him: ‘He is better by far than his father,’
480 as he comes in from the fighting; and let him kill his enemy
and bring home the blooded spoils, and delight the heart of his mother.”
So speaking he set his child again in the arms of his beloved
wife, who took him back again to her fragrant bosom
smiling in her tears; and her husband saw, and took pity upon her,
485 and stroked her with his hand, and called her by name and spoke to
her:
“Poor Andromachē! Why does your heart sorrow so much for me?
No man is going to hurl me to Hades, unless it is fated,
but as for fate, I think that no man yet has escaped it
once it has taken its first form, neither brave man nor coward.
490 Go therefore back to our house, and take up your own work,
the loom and the distaff, and see to it that your handmaidens
ply their work also; but the men must see to the fighting,
all men who are the people of Ilion, but I beyond others.”
So glorious Hektor spoke and again took up the helmet
495 with its crest of horse-hair, while his beloved wife went homeward,
turning to look back on the way, letting the live tears fall.
And as she came in speed into the well-settled household
of Hektor the slayer of men, she found numbers of handmaidens
within, and her coming stirred all of them into lamentation.
500 So they mourned in his house over Hektor while he was living
still, for they thought he would never again come back from the
fighting
alive, escaping the Achaian hands and their violence.

But Paris in turn did not linger long in his high house,
but when he had put on his glorious armor with bronze elaborate
505 he ran in the confidence of his quick feet through the city.
As when some stalled horse who has been corn-fed at the manger
breaking free of his rope gallops over the plain in thunder
to his accustomed bathing place in a sweet-running river
and in the pride of his strength holds high his head, and the mane floats
510 over his shoulders; sure of his glorious strength, the quick knees
carry him to the loved places and the pasture of horses;
so from uttermost Pergamos came Paris, the son of
Priam, shining in all his armor of war as the sun shines,
laughing aloud, and his quick feet carried him; suddenly thereafter
515 he came on brilliant Hektor, his brother, where he yet lingered
before turning away from the place where he had talked with his lady.
It was Alexandros the godlike who first spoke to him:
“Brother, I fear that I have held back your haste, by being
slow on the way, not coming in time, as you commanded me.”
520 Then tall Hektor of the shining helm spoke to him in answer:
“Strange man! There is no way that one, giving judgment in fairness,
could dishonor your work in battle, since you are a strong man.
But of your own accord you hang back, unwilling. And my heart
is grieved in its thought, when I hear shameful things spoken about you
525 by the Trojans, who undergo hard fighting for your sake.
Let us go now; some day hereafter we will make all right
with the immortal gods in the sky, if Zeus ever grant it,
setting up to them in our houses the wine-bowl of liberty
after we have driven out of Troy the strong-greaved Achaians.”

BOOK SEVEN

So speaking Hektor the glorious swept on through the gates,
and with him went Alexandros his brother, both of them minded
in their hearts to do battle and take their part in the fighting.
And as to men of the sea in their supplication the god sends
5
a fair wind, when they are breaking their strength at the smoothed oarsweeps,
driving over the sea, and their arms are weak with weariness,
so these two appeared to the Trojans, who had longed for them.
Each killed his man: Paris, the son of lord Areïthoös,
Menesthios, who lived in Arne, born to him of the war club
10 Areïthoös, and to ox-eyed Phylomedousa;
while Hektor with the sharp spear struck Eïoneus, under
the circle of the bronze helm, in the neck, and broke his limbs’ strength.
And Glaukos, lord of the Lykian men, the son of Hippolochos,
struck down with the spear Iphinoös in the strong encounter,
15 Dexias’ son, as he leapt up behind his fast horses, striking him
in the shoulder. He dropped from car to ground, and his limbs’ strength
was broken.
Now as the goddess gray-eyed Athene was aware of these two
destroying the men of Argos in the strong encounter,
she went down in a flash of speed from the peaks of Olympos
20 to sacred Ilion, where Apollo stirred forth to meet her
from his seat on Pergamos, where he planned that the Trojans should
conquer.
These two then encountered each other beside the oak tree,
and speaking first the son of Zeus, lord Apollo, addressed her:
“What can be your desire this time, O daughter of great Zeus,

25 that you came down from Olympos at the urge of your mighty spirit?
To give the Danaäns victory in the battle, turning it
back? Since you have no pity at all for the Trojans who are dying.
But if you might only do as I say, it would be far better.
For this day let us put an end to the hatred and the fighting
30 now; they shall fight again hereafter, till we witness the finish
they make of Ilion, since it is dear to the heart of you, who
are goddesses immortal, that this city shall be made desolate.”
Then in answer the goddess gray-eyed Athene spoke to him:
“Worker from afar, thus let it be. These were my thoughts also
35 as I came down from Olympos among the Achaians and Trojans.
Tell me then, how are you minded to stop these men in their fighting?”
Now in turn the son of Zeus, lord Apollo, addressed her:
“Let us rouse up the strong heart in Hektor, breaker of horses,
if he might call forth some Danaän to do battle against him,
40 single man against single man, in bitter combat;
and let the strong-greaved Achaians, stirred into admiration,
send forth a single man to do battle with brilliant Hektor.”
He spoke, nor failed to persuade the goddess gray-eyed Athene.
Now Helenos, Priam’s beloved son, gathered into his heart their
45 deliberation, and all that pleased the musing divinities.
He went on his way and stood beside Hektor and spoke a word to him:
“Hektor, O son of Priam and equal of Zeus in counsel,
would you now be persuaded by me, for I am your brother?
Make the rest of the Trojans sit down, and all the Achaians,
50 and yourself call forth one of the Achaians, their bravest,
to fight man to man against you in bitter combat.
Since it is not your destiny yet to die and encounter
fate. For thus I heard it in the speech of the gods everlasting.”
So he spoke, and Hektor hearing his word was happy,
55 and went into the space between and forced back the Trojan battalions,
holding his spear by the middle, until they were all seated,
while Agamemnon in turn seated the strong-greaved Achaians,
and Athene and the lord of the silver bow, Apollo,
assuming the likenesses of birds, of vultures, settled

60 aloft the great oak tree of their father, Zeus of the aegis,
taking their ease and watching these men whose ranks, dense-settled,
shuddered into a bristle of spears, of shields and of helmets.
As when the shudder of the west wind suddenly rising
scatters across the water, and the water darkens beneath it,
65 so darkening were settled the ranks of Achaians and Trojans
in the plain. And now Hektor spoke forth between them:
“Listen to me, you Trojans and strong-greaved Achaians,
while I speak forth what the heart within my breast urges.
Zeus, son of Kronos, who sits on high, would not bring to fulfillment
70 our oaths, but is found to be of evil intention toward both sides
until that day when you storm Troy of the strong towers, or that day
when you yourselves are broken beside your seafaring vessels.
Seeing now that among you are the bravest of all the Achaians,
let one of you, whose heart stirs him to combat against me,
75 stand forth before all to fight by himself against brilliant Hektor.
Behold the terms that I make, let Zeus be witness upon them.
If with the thin edge of the bronze he takes my life, then
let him strip my armor and carry it back to the hollow ships,
but give my body to be taken home again, so that the Trojans
80 and the wives of the Trojans may give me in death my rite of burning.
But if I take his life, and Apollo grants me the glory,
I will strip his armor and carry it to sacred Ilion
and hang it in front of the temple of far-striking Apollo,
but his corpse I will give back among the strong-benched vessels
85 so that the flowing-haired Achaians may give him due burial
and heap up a mound upon him beside the broad passage of Helle.
And some day one of the men to come will say, as he sees it,
one who in his benched ship sails on the wine-blue water:
‘This is the mound of a man who died long ago in battle,
90 who was one of the bravest, and glorious Hektor killed him.’
So will he speak some day, and my glory will not be forgotten.”
So he spoke, and all of them stayed stricken to silence
in shame of refusing him, and in fear to take up his challenge.
But now at long last Menelaos stood forth and addressed them

95 in scorn and reproach, and stirred within the heart to great sorrow:
“Ah me! You brave in words, you women, not men, of Achaia!
This will be a defilement upon us, shame upon shame piled,
if no one of the Danaäns goes out to face Hektor.
No, may all of youturn to water and earth, all of you
100 who sit by yourselves with no life in you, utterly dishonored.
I myself will arm against this man. While above us
the threads of victory are held in the hands of the immortals.”
So he spoke, and began to put on his splendid armor.
And there, O Menelaos, would have shown forth the end of your life
105 under the hands of Hektor, since he was far stronger than you were,
had not the kings of the Achaians leapt up and caught you;
and the son of Atreus himself, powerful Agamemnon,
caught you by the right hand, and called you by name, and spoke to
you:
“Menelaos, beloved of God, you are mad; you have no need
110 to take leave of your senses thus. Hold fast, though it hurts you,
nor long in your pride to fight with a man who is better than you are,
with Hektor, Priam’s son. There are others who shudder before him.
Even Achilleus, in the fighting where men win glory,
trembles to meet this man, and he is far better than you are.
115 Go back now and sit down in the throng of your own companions;
the Achaians will set up another to fight against this man,
and even though he is without fear, and can never be glutted
with rough work, I think he will be glad to leave off, even
if he comes off whole from the hateful fighting and bitter combat.”

120

The hero spoke like this and bent the heart of his brother
since he urged wisely. And Menelaos obeyed him; his henchmen
joyfully thereupon took off the armor from his shoulders.
Nestor among the Argives now stood forth and addressed them:
“Oh, for shame. Great sorrow settles on the land of Achaia.
125 Surely he would groan aloud, Peleus, the aged horseman,
the great man of counsel among the Myrmidons, and their speaker.

Once, as he questioned me in his house, he was filled with great joy
as he heard the generation and blood of all of the Argives.
Now if he were to hear how all cringe away before Hektor,
130 many a time he would lift up his very hands to the immortals,
and the life breath from his limbs would go down into the house of
Hades.
If only, O father Zeus, Athene, Apollo,
I were in my youth as when the Pylians assembled
and the spear-fighting Arkadians battled by swirling Keladon,
135 by the streams of Iardanos and before the ramparts of Pheia.
Their champion stood forth, Ereuthalion, a man godlike,
wearing upon his shoulders the armor of lord Areïthoös,
Areïthoös the brilliant, given by the men of that time
and the fair-girdled women the name club-fighter, because he
140 went into battle armed neither with the bow nor the long spear,
but with a great bar clubbed of iron broke the battalions.
Lykourgos killed this man by craft, not strength, for he met him
in the narrow pass of the way, where the iron club served not to parry
destruction, for Lykourgos, too quick with a stab beneath it,
145 pinned him through the middle with the spear, so he went down
backward
to the ground; and he stripped the armor brazen Ares had given him
and wore the armor thereafter himself through the grind of battle.
But when Lykourgos was grown an old man in his halls, he gave it
to his beloved henchman, Ereuthalion, to carry.
150 Wearing this armor he called forth all the bravest to fight him,
but they were all afraid and trembling: none had the courage,
only I, for my hard-enduring heart in its daring
drove me to fight him. I in age was the youngest of all of them.
And I fought with him, and Pallas Athene gave me the glory.
155 Of all the men I have killed this was the tallest and strongest.
For he sprawled in his great bulk this way and that way. If only
I were young now, as then, and the strength still steady within me;
Hektor of the glancing helm would soon find his battle.
But you, now, who are the bravest of all the Achaians,
160 are not minded with a good will to go against Hektor.”

So the old man scolded them, and nine in all stood forth.
Far the first to rise up was the lord of men, Agamemnon,
and rose after him the son of Tydeus, strong Diomedes,
and next the two Aiantes rose, their fierce strength upon them,
165 and after these Idomeneus, and Idomeneus’ companion,
Meriones, a match for the murderous Lord of Battles,
and after these Eurypylos, the glorious son of Euaimon,
and Thoas rose up, Andraimon’s son, and brilliant Odysseus.
All of these were willing to fight against brilliant Hektor.
170 Now before them again spoke the Gerenian horseman, Nestor:
“Let the lot be shaken for all of you, to see who wins it.
He shall be the one to gladden the strong-greaved Achaians,
and to be glad within his own heart, if he can come off
whole again from the hateful battle and bitter combat.”
175 So he spoke, and each of them marked a lot as his own one lot.
They threw them in the helmet of Atreus’ son, Agamemnon,
and the people, holding up their hands to the gods, prayed to them.
Then would murmur any man, gazing into the wide sky:
“Father Zeus, let Aias win the lot, or else Diomedes,
180 Tydeus’ son, or the king himself of golden Mykenai.”
So they spoke, and Nestor the Gerenian horseman shook the lots,
and a lot leapt from the helmet, that one that they all had wished for,
the lot of Aias; and a herald carrying it all through the great throng
showed it from left to right to the great men of the Achaians,
185 all of them. Each man knew not the mark, and denied it,
but as carrying it all through the great throng he showed it to that one
who had marked it as his, and thrown it in the helmet, glorious Aias,
he held forth his hand, and the herald stood by him, and put the lot in it,
and he saw his mark on the lot, and knew it, and his heart was
gladdened.
190 “He threw it down on the ground beside his foot, and spoke to them:
See, friends, the lot is mine, and I myself am made happy
in my heart, since I think I can win over brilliant Hektor.
Do this, then: while I put on my armor of fighting,
all of you be praying to the lord Zeus, the son of Kronos,
195 in silence and each to himself, let none of the Trojans hear you;

or openly out loud, since we have nothing to be afraid of
at all, since no man by force will beat me backward unwilling
as he wills, nor by craft either, since I think that the man who was born
and raised in Salamis, myself, is not such a novice.”
200 So he spoke, and they prayed to the lord Zeus, the son of Kronos.
And then would murmur any man, gazing into the wide sky:
“Father Zeus, watching over us from Ida, most high, most honored,
grant that Aias win the vaunt of renown and the victory;
but if truly you love Hektor and are careful for him,
205 give to both of them equal strength, make equal their honor.”

So they spoke, and meanwhile Aias armed him in shining
bronze. Then when he had girt his body in all its armor,
he strode on his way, as Ares the war god walks gigantic
going into the fighting of men whom the son of Kronos
210 has driven to fight angrily in heart-perishing hatred.
Such was Aias as he strode gigantic, the wall of the Achaians,
smiling under his threatening brows, with his feet beneath him
taking huge strides forward, and shaking the spear far-shadowing.
And the Argives looking upon him were made glad, while the Trojans
215 were taken every man in the knees with trembling and terror,
and for Hektor himself the heart beat hard in his breast, but he could
not
anymore find means to take flight and shrink back into
the throng of his men, since he in his pride had called him to battle.
Now Aias came near him, carrying like a wall his shield
220 of bronze and sevenfold ox-hide which Tychios wrought him with
much toil;
Tychios, at home in Hyle, far the best of all workers in leather
who had made him the great gleaming shield of sevenfold ox-hide
from strong bulls, and hammered an eighth fold of bronze upon it.
Telamonian Aias, carrying this to cover
225 his chest, came near to Hektor and spoke to him in words of menace:
“Hektor, single man against single man you will learn now

for sure what the bravest men are like among the Danaäns
even after Achilleus the lion-hearted who breaks men in battle.
He lies now apart among his own beaked seafaring
230 ships, in anger at Agamemnon, the shepherd of the people.
But here are we; and we are such men as can stand up against you;
there are plenty of us; so now begin your fight and your combat.”
Tall Hektor of the glancing helm answered him: “Aias,
son of Telamon, seed of Zeus, O lord of the people,
235 do not be testing me as if I were some ineffectual
boy, or a woman, who knows nothing of the works of warfare.
I know well myself how to fight and kill men in battle;
I know how to turn to the right, how to turn to the left the ox-hide
tanned into a shield which is my protection in battle;
240 I know how to storm my way into the struggle of flying horses;
I know how to tread my measures on the grim floor of the war god.
Yet great as you are I would not strike you by stealth, watching
for my chance, but openly, so, if perhaps I might hit you.”
So he spoke, and balanced the spear far-shadowed, and threw it,
245 and struck the sevenfold-ox-hide terrible shield of Aias
in the uttermost bronze, which was the eighth layer upon it,
and the unwearying bronze spearhead shore its way through six folds
but was stopped in the seventh ox-hide. Then after him Aias
the illustrious in turn cast with his spear far-shadowing
250 and struck the shield of Priam’s son on its perfect circle.
All the way through the glittering shield went the heavy spearhead,
and crashed its way through the intricately worked corselet;
straight ahead by the flank the spearhead shore through his tunic,
yet he bent away to one side and avoided the dark death.
255 Both now gripping in their hands the long spears pulled them
out, and went at each other like lions who live on raw meat,
or wild boars, whose strength is no light thing. The son of
Priam stabbed then with his spear into the shield’s center,
nor did the bronze point break its way through, but the spearhead bent
back.
260 Now Aias plunging upon him thrust at the shield, and the spearhead
passed clean through, and pounded Hektor back in his fury,

and tore at his neck passing so that the dark blood broke. Yet
even so Hektor of the shining helmet did not stop fighting,
but gave back and in his heavy hand caught up a stone that
265 lay in the plain, black and rugged and huge. With this
he struck the sevenfold-ox-hide terrible shield of Aias
in the knob of the center so that the bronze clashed loud about it.
After him Aias in turn lifting a stone far greater
whirled it and threw, leaning into the cast his strength beyond measure,
270 and the shield broke inward under the stroke of the rock like a
millstone,
and Hektor’s very knees gave, so that he sprawled backward,
shield beaten upon him, but at once Apollo lifted him upright.
And now they would have been stabbing with their swords at close
quarters,
had not the heralds, messengers of Zeus and of mortals,
275 come up, one for the bronze-armored Achaians, one for the Trojans,
Idaios and Talthybios, both men of good counsel.
They held their staves between the two men, and the herald Idaios
out of his knowledge of prudent advices spoke a word to them:
“Stop the fight, dear children, nor go on with this battle.
280 To Zeus who gathers the clouds both of you are beloved,
and both of you are fighters; this thing all of us know surely.
Night darkens now. It is a good thing to give way to the night-time.”
Aias the son of Telamon spoke to him in answer:
“Bid Hektor answer this, Idaios, since it was he who
285 in his pride called forth all our bravest to fight him.
Let him speak first; and I for my part shall do as he urges.”
Tall Hektor of the glancing helm answered him: “Aias,
seeing that God has given you strength, stature and wisdom
also, and with the spear you surpass the other Achaians,
290 let us now give over this fighting and hostility
for today; we shall fight again, until the divinity
chooses between us, and gives victory to one or the other.
Night darkens now. It is a good thing to give way to the night-time.
Thus you may bring joy to all the Achaians beside their
295 ships, and above all to those who are your own kindred and company;

and I in the great city of lord Priam will gladden
the Trojans, and the women of Troy with their trailing robes, who
will go before the divine assembly in thanksgiving for my sake.
Come then, let us give each other glorious presents,
300 so that any of the Achaians or Trojans may say of us:
‘These two fought each other in heart-consuming hate, then
joined with each other in close friendship, before they were parted.’”
So he spoke, and bringing a sword with nails of silver
gave it to him, together with the sheath and the well-cut sword belt,
305 and Aias gave a war belt colored shining with purple.
So separating, Aias went among the Achaian people,
and Hektor went back to the thronging Trojans, who were made happy
when they saw him coming alive and unwounded out of the combat,
escaping the strength and the unconquerable hands of Aias,
310 and they, who had not hoped to see him alive, escorted him
back to the town. On the other side the strong-greaved Achaians
led Aias, happy in his victory, to great Agamemnon.
When these had come to the shelters of the son of Atreus,
Agamemnon the lord of men dedicated an ox among them,
315 a five-year-old male, to Zeus, all-powerful son of Kronos.
They skinned the victim and put it in order, and butchered the carcass,
and cut up the meat expertly into small pieces, and spitted them,
and roasted all carefully, and took off the pieces.
Then after they had finished the work and got the feast ready,
320 they feasted, nor was any man’s hunger denied a fair portion;
and Atreus’ son, the hero wide-ruling Agamemnon,
gave to Aias in honor the long cuts of the chine’s portion.
But when they had put away their desire for eating and drinking,
the aged man began to weave his counsel before them
325 first, Nestor, whose advice had shown best before this.
He in kind intention toward all stood forth and addressed them:
“Son of Atreus, and you other great men of all the Achaians:
seeing that many flowing-haired Achaians have died here,
whose dark blood has been scattered beside the fair waters of
Skamandros

330 by the fierce war god, while their souls went down into the house of
Hades;
therefore with the dawn we should set a pause to the fighting
of Achaians, and assembling them wheel back the bodies
with mules and oxen; then must we burn them a little apart from
the ships, so that each whose duty it is may carry the bones back
335 to a man’s children, when we go home to the land of our fathers.
And let us gather and pile one single mound on the corpse-pyre
indiscriminately from the plain, and build fast upon it
towered ramparts, to be a defense of ourselves and our vessels.
And let us build into these walls gates strongly fitted
340 that there may be a way through them for the driving of horses;
and on the outer side, and close, we must dig a deep ditch
circling it, so as to keep off their people and horses,
that we may not be crushed under the attack of these proud Trojans.”
So he spoke, and all the kings gave him their approval.
345 Now there was an assembly of Trojans high on the city of Ilion
fiercely shaken to tumult before the doors of Priam,
and among these Antenor the thoughtful began to address them:
“Trojans and Dardanians and companions in arms: hear me
while I speak forth what the heart within my breast urges.
350 Come then: let us give back Helen of Argos and all her possessions
to the sons of Atreus to take away, seeing now we fight with
our true pledges made into lies; and I see no good thing’s
accomplishment for us in the end, unless we do this.”
He spoke thus and sat down again, and among them rose up
355 brilliant Alexandros, the lord of lovely-haired Helen,
who spoke to him in answer and addressed them in winged words:
“Antenor, these things that you argue please me no longer.
Your mind knows how to contrive a saying better than this one.
But if in all seriousness this is your true argument; then
360 it is the very gods who ruined the brain within you.
I will speak out before the Trojans, breakers of horses.
I refuse, straight out. I will not give back the woman.
But of the possessions I carried away to our house from Argos
I am willing to give all back, and to add to these from my own goods.”

365

He spoke thus and sat down again, and among them rose up
Priam, son of Dardanos, equal of the gods in counsel,
who in kind intention toward all stood forth and addressed them:
“Trojans and Dardanians and companions in arms: hear me
while I speak forth what the heart within my breast urges.
370 Take now your supper about the city, as you did before this,
and remember your duty of the watch, and be each man wakeful;
and at dawn let Idaios go to the hollow ships, and speak with
the sons of Atreus, Menelaos and Agamemnon, giving
the word of Alexandros, for whose sake this strife has arisen,
375 and to add this solid message, and ask them if they are willing
to stop the sorrowful fighting until we can burn the bodies
of our dead. We shall fight again until the divinity
chooses between us, and gives victory to one or the other.”
So he spoke, and they listened to him with care, and obeyed him;
380 and so took their supper, watch succeeding watch, through the army.
Then at dawn Idaios went down to the hollow ships, where
he found the Danaäns, henchmen of the war god, in assembly
beside the stern of Agamemnon’s ship; the herald
with the great voice took his stand in their midst, and spoke to them:
385 “Son of Atreus, and you other great men of all the Achaians,
Priam and the rest of the haughty Trojans have bidden me
give you, if this message be found to your pleasure and liking,
the word of Alexandros, for whose sake this strife has arisen.
All those possessions that Alexandros carried in his hollow
390 ships to Troy, and I wish that he had perished before then,
he is willing to give all back, and to add to these from his own goods.
But the very wedded wife of glorious Menelaos
he says that he will not give, though the Trojans would have him do it.
They told me to give you this message also, if you are willing;
395 to stop the sorrowful fighting until we can burn the bodies
of our dead. We shall fight again afterward, until the divinity
chooses between us, and gives victory to one or the other.”
So he spoke, and all of them stayed quiet in silence;
but now at long last Diomedes of the great war cry addressed them:

400 “Now let none accept the possessions of Alexandros,
nor take back Helen; one who is very simple can see it,
that by this time the terms of death hang over the Trojans.”
So he spoke, and all sons of the Achaians shouted
acclaim for the word of Diomedes, breaker of horses;
405 and now powerful Agamemnon spoke to Idaios:
“Idaios, you hear for yourself the word of the Achaians,
how they are answering you; and such is my pleasure also.
But about the burning of the dead bodies I do not begrudge you;
no, for there is no sparing time for the bodies of the perished,
410 once they have died, to give them swiftly the pity of burning.
Let Zeus, high-thundering lord of Hera, witness our pledges.”
He spoke, and held up the scepter in the sight of all the gods. Then
Idaios made his way back once more to sacred Ilion.
The Trojans and Dardanians were in session of assembly,
415 all gathered in one place, awaiting Idaios when he might come
back; and he returned to them and delivered his message
standing there in their midst, and they made their swift preparations,
for two things, some to gather the bodies, and the others firewood;
while the Argives on the other side from their strong-benched vessels
420 went forward, some to gather the bodies, and others firewood.
Now the sun of a new day struck on the ploughlands, rising
out of the quiet water and the deep stream of the ocean
to climb the sky. The Trojans assembled together. They found
it hard to recognize each individual dead man;
425 but with water they washed away the blood that was on them
and as they wept warm tears they lifted them onto the wagons.
But great Priam would not let them cry out; and in silence
they piled the bodies upon the pyre, with their hearts in sorrow,
and burned them upon the fire, and went back to sacred Ilion.
430 In the same way on the other side the strong-greaved Achaians
piled their own slain upon the pyre, with their hearts in sorrow,
and burned them upon the fire, and went back to their hollow vessels.
But when the dawn was not yet, but still the pallor of night’s edge,
a chosen body of the Achaians formed by the pyre;

435 and they gathered together and piled one single mound all above it
indiscriminately from the plain, and built a fort on it
with towered ramparts, to be a defense for themselves and their vessels;
and they built within these walls gates strongly fitted
that there might be a way through them for the driving of horses;
440 and on the outer side and against it they dug a deep ditch,
making it great and wide, and fixed the sharp stakes inside it.
So the flowing-haired Achaians labored, and meanwhile
the gods in session at the side of Zeus who handles the lightning
watched the huge endeavor of the bronze-armored Achaians;
445 and the god Poseidon who shakes the earth began speaking among
them:
“Father Zeus, is there any mortal left on the wide earth
who will still declare to the immortals his mind and his purpose?
Do you not see how now these flowing-haired Achaians
have built a wall landward of their ships, and driven about it
450 a ditch, and not given to the gods any grand sacrifice?
Now the fame of this will last as long as dawnlight is scattered,
and men will forget that wall which I and Phoibos Apollo
built with our hard work for the hero Laomedon’s city.”
Deeply troubled, Zeus who gathers the clouds answered him:
455 “What a thing to have said, earth-shaker of the wide strength.
Some other one of the gods might fear such a thought, one who
is a god far weaker of his hands and in anger than you are;
but the fame of you shall last as long as dawnlight is scattered.
Come then! After once more the flowing-haired Achaians
460 are gone back with their ships to the beloved land of their fathers,
break their wall to pieces and scatter it into the salt sea
and pile again the beach deep under the sands and cover it;
so let the great wall of the Achaians go down to destruction.”
As these two were talking thus together, the sun went
465 down, and the work of the Achaians was finished. They slaughtered
oxen then beside their shelters, and took their supper.
The ships came over to them from Lemnos bringing them wine, ships

sent over to them in numbers by the son of Jason, Euneos,
whom Hypsipyle had borne to the shepherd of the people, Jason.
470 Apart to the sons of Atreus, Agamemnon and Menelaos,
Jason’s son had given wine as a gift, a thousand
measures; and thence the rest of the flowing-haired Achaians
bought wine, some for bronze and others for shining iron,
some for skins and some for the whole oxen, while others
475 paid slaves taken in war; and they made their feasting abundant.
All night long thereafter the flowing-haired Achaians
feasted, and the Trojans and their companions in arms in the city;
but all night long Zeus of the counsels was threatening evil
upon them in the terrible thunderstroke. Green fear took hold of them.
480 They spilled the wine on the ground from their cups, and none was so
hardy
as to drink, till he had poured to the all-powerful son of Kronos.
They lay down thereafter and took the blessing of slumber.

BOOK EIGHT

Now Dawn the yellow-robed scattered over all the earth. Zeus
who joys in the thunder made an assembly of all the immortals
upon the highest peak of rugged Olympos. There he
spoke to them himself, and the other divinities listened:
5 “Hear me, all you gods and all you goddesses: hear me
while I speak forth what the heart within my breast urges.
Now let no female divinity, nor male god either,
presume to cut across the way of my word, but consent to it
all of you, so that I can make an end in speed of these matters.
10 And anyone I perceive against the gods’ will attempting
to go among the Trojans and help them, or among the Danaäns,
he shall go whipped against his dignity back to Olympos;
or I shall take him and dash him down to the murk of Tartaros,
far below, where the uttermost depth of the pit lies under
15 earth, where there are gates of iron and a brazen doorstone,
as far beneath the house of Hades as from earth the sky lies.
Then he will see how far I am strongest of all the immortals.
Come, you gods, make this endeavor, that you all may learn this.
Let down out of the sky a cord of gold; lay hold of it
20 all you who are gods and all who are goddesses, yet not
even so can you drag down Zeus from the sky to the ground, not
Zeus the high lord of counsel, though you try until you grow weary.
Yet whenever I might strongly be minded to pull you,
I could drag you up, earth and all and sea and all with you,
25 then fetch the golden rope about the horn of Olympos
and make it fast, so that all once more should dangle in mid air.
So much stronger am I than the gods, and stronger than mortals.”
So he spoke, and all of them stayed stricken to silence,

stunned at his word, for indeed he had spoken to them very strongly.
30 But now at long last the goddess gray-eyed Athene answered him:
“Son of Kronos, our father, O lordliest of the mighty,
we know already your strength and how none can stand up against it.
Yet even so we are sorrowful for the Danaän spearmen
who must fill out an unhappy destiny, and perish.
35 Still we shall keep out of the fighting, as you command us;
yet we will put good counsel in the Argives; if it may help them,
so that not all of them will die because of your anger.”
Then Zeus the gatherer of the clouds smiled at her and answered:
“Tritogeneia, dear daughter, do not lose heart; for I say this
40 not in outright anger, and my meaning toward you is kindly.”
He spoke, and under the chariot harnessed his bronze-shod horses,
flying-footed, with long manes streaming of gold; and he put on
clothing of gold about his own body, and took up the golden
lash, carefully compacted, and climbed up into his chariot,
45 and whipped them into a run, and they winged their way unreluctant
through the space between the earth and the starry heaven.
He came to Ida with all her springs, the mother of wild beasts,
to Gargaron, where was his holy ground and his smoking altar.
There the father of gods and of mortals halted his horses,
50 and slipped them from their harness, and drifted close mist about them,
and himself rejoicing in the pride of his strength sat down on the
mountain
looking out over the city of Troy and the ships of the Achaians.
Now the flowing-haired Achaians had taken their dinner
lightly among their shelters, and they put on their armor thereafter;
55 and on the other side, in the city, the Trojans took up
their armor, fewer men, yet minded to stand the encounter
even so, caught in necessity, for their wives and their children.
And all the gates were made open, and the fighting men swept through
them,
the foot ranks and the horsemen, and the sound grew huge of their
onset.

60

Now as these advancing came to one place and encountered,
they dashed their shields together and their spears, and the strength of
armored men in bronze, and the shields massive in the middle
clashed against each other, and the sound grew huge of the fighting.
There the screaming and the shouts of triumph rose up together
65 of men killing and men killed, and the ground ran blood.
So long as it was early morning and the sacred daylight increasing,
so long the thrown weapons of both took hold and men dropped under
them.
But when the sun god stood bestriding the middle heaven,
then the father balanced his golden scales, and in them
70 he set two fateful portions of death, which lays men prostrate,
for Trojans, breakers of horses, and bronze-armored Achaians,
and balanced it by the middle. The Achaians’ death-day was heaviest.
There the fates of the Achaians settled down toward the bountiful
earth, while those of the Trojans were lifted into the wide sky;
75 and he himself crashed a great stroke from Ida, and a kindling
flash shot over the people of the Achaians; seeing it
they were stunned, and pale terror took hold of all of them.
Then Idomeneus dared not stand his ground, nor Agamemnon,
nor did the two Aiantes stand, the henchmen of Ares,
80 only Gerenian Nestor stayed, the Achaians’ watcher;
not that he would, but his horse was failing, struck by an arrow
from brilliant Alexandros, the lord of lovely-haired Helen;
struck at the point of the head, where the utmost hairs of horses
are grown along the skull, and which is a place most mortal.
85 He reared up in agony as the shaft went into the brain, then
threw the team into confusion writhing upon the bronze point.
Now as the old man hewed away the horse’s trace-harness
with a quick sword-cut, meanwhile the fast-running horses of Hektor
came through the flux of the fighting and carried their daring driver,
90 Hektor; and now the old man would have lost his life there, had not
Diomedes of the great war cry sharply perceived him.
He cried out in a terrible voice to rally Odysseus:
“Son of Laërtes and seed of Zeus, resourceful Odysseus,

where are you running, turning your back in battle like a coward?
95 Do not let them strike the spear in your back as you run for it,
but stay, so that we can beat back this fierce man from the ancient.”
He spoke, but long-suffering great Odysseus gave no attention
as he swept by on his way to the hollow ships of the Achaians.
The son of Tydeus, alone as he was, went among the champions
100 and stood before the horses of the old man, the son of Neleus,
and uttering his winged words he addressed him: “Old sir,
in very truth these young fighters are too much for you,
and all your strength is gone, and hard old age is upon you,
your henchman is a man of no worth, and your horses are heavy.
105 Come then, climb into my chariot, so that you may see
what the Trojan horses are like, how they understand their
plain, and how to traverse it in rapid pursuit and withdrawal;
horses I took away from Aineias, who strikes men to terror.
Let the henchmen look after your horses now, while we two
110 steer these against the Trojans, breakers of horses, so Hektor
even may know if my spear also rages in my hands’ grip.”
He spoke, and Nestor the Gerenian horseman obeyed him.
Thereon the two strong henchmen, Sthenelos and the courtly
Eurymedon, looked after the horses of Nestor. The others
115 both together mounted the chariot of Diomedes.
Nestor in his hands took up the glittering reins, then
lashed the horses on, and soon they were close to Hektor,
and as he raged straight forward the son of Tydeus threw at him
and missed his man, but struck the charioteer, his henchman,
120 Eniopeus, the son of high-hearted Thebaios, striking him
in the chest next to the nipple as he gripped the reins of his horses.
He fell out of the chariot, and the fast-footed horses
shied away. And there his life and his strength were scattered.
And bitter sorrow closed over Hektor’s heart for his driver,
125 yet grieving as he did for his friend he left him to lie there,
and went on after another bold charioteer; and it was not
long that the horses went lacking a driver, since soon he found one,
Archeptolemos, bold son of Iphitos, and gave into his hands
the reins, and mounted him behind the fast-running horses.

130

And now there would have been fighting beyond control, and
destruction,
now they would have been driven and penned like sheep against Ilion,
had not the father of gods and of men sharply perceived them.
He thundered horribly and let loose the shimmering lightning
and dashed it to the ground in front of the horses of Diomedes
135 and a ghastly blaze of flaming sulfur shot up, and the horses
terrified both cringed away against the chariot.
And the glittering reins escaped out of the hands of Nestor,
and he was afraid in his heart and called out to Diomedes:
“Son of Tydeus, steer now to flight your single-foot horses.
140 Can you not see that the power of Zeus no longer is with you?
For the time Zeus, son of Kronos, gives glory to this man;
for today; hereafter, if he will, he will give it
to us also; no man can beat back the purpose of Zeus, not
even one very strong, since Zeus is by far the greater.”
145 Then in turn Diomedes of the great war cry answered:
“Yes, old sir, all this you have said is fair and orderly.
But this thought comes as a bitter sorrow to my heart and my spirit;
for some day Hektor will say openly before the Trojans:
‘The son of Tydeus, running before me, fled to his vessels.’
150 So he will vaunt; and then let the wide earth open beneath me.”
Nestor the Gerenian horseman spoke to him in answer:
“Ah me, son of brave Tydeus; what a thing to have spoken.
If Hektor calls you a coward and a man of no strength, then
the Trojans and Dardanians will never believe him,
155 nor will the wives of the high-hearted Trojan warriors,
they whose husbands you hurled in the dust in the pride of their
manhood.”
So he spoke, and turned to flight the single-foot horses
back again into the rout; and now the Trojans and Hektor
with unearthly clamor showered their baneful missiles upon them,
160 and tall Hektor of the shining helm called out in a great voice:

“Son of Tydeus, beyond others the fast-mounted Danaäns honored you
with pride of place, the choice meats and the filled wine-cups.
But now they will disgrace you, who are no better than a woman.
Down with you, you poor doll. You shall not storm our battlements
165 with me giving way before you, you shall not carry our women
home in your ships; before that comes I will give you your destiny.”
He spoke, and the son of Tydeus pondered doubtfully, whether
to turn his horses about and match his strength against Hektor.
Three times in his heart and spirit he pondered turning,
170 and three times from the hills of Ida Zeus of the counsels
thundered, giving a sign to the Trojans that the battle was turning.
But Hektor called afar in a great voice to the Trojans:
“Trojans, Lykians and Dardanians who fight at close quarters,
be men now, dear friends, remember your furious valor.
175 I see that the son of Kronos has bowed his head and assented
to my high glory and success, but granted the Danaäns
disaster: fools, who designed with care these fortifications,
flimsy things, not worth a thought, which will not beat my strength
back, but lightly my horses will leap the ditch they have dug them.
180 But after I have come beside their hollow ships, let there
be some who will remember to bring me ravening fire,
so that I can set their ships on fire, and cut down
the very Argives mazed in the smoke at the side of their vessels.”
So he spoke, and called aloud to his horses, and spoke to them:
180 “Xanthos and you, Podargos, Aithon and Lampos the shining,
now repay me for all that loving care in abundanceē
Andromachē the daughter of high-hearted Eëtion
gave you: the sweet-hearted wheat before all the others
and mixed wine with it for you to drink, when her heart inclined to it,
190 as for me, who am proud that I am her young husband.
Follow close now and be rapid, so we may capture
the shield of Nestor, whose high fame goes up to the sky now,
how it is all of gold, the shield itself and the cross-rods;
and strip from the shoulders of Diomedes, breaker of horses,
195 that elaborate corselet that Hephaistos wrought with much toil.

Could we capture these two things, I might hope the Achaians
might embark this very night on their fast-running vessels.”
So he spoke, boasting, and the lady Hera was angry,
and started upon her throne, and tall Olympos was shaken,
200 and she spoke straight out to the great god Poseidon:
“For shame, now, far-powerful shaker of the earth. In your breast
the heart takes no sorrow for the Danaäns who are dying,
they who at Helikē and at Aigai bring you offerings
numerous and delightful. Do you then plan that they conquer.
205 For if all of us who stand by the Danaäns only were willing
to hurl back the Trojans and hold off Zeus of the broad brows,
he would be desperate, there where he sits by himself on Ida.”
Deeply troubled, the powerful shaker of the earth answered her,
“Hera, reckless of word, what sort of thing have you spoken?
210 I would not be willing that all the rest of us fight with
Zeus, the son of Kronos, since he is so much the greater.”
Now as these two were talking thus to each other, meanwhile
for those others, all that space which the ditch of the wall held
off from the ships was filled with armored men and with horses
215 penned there; and he who penned them was a man like the rapid war
god,
Hektor, Priam’s son, since Zeus was giving him glory.
And now he might have kindled their balanced ships with the hot
flame,
had not the lady Hera set it in Agamemnon’s
heart to rush in with speed himself and stir the Achaians.
220 He went on his way beside the Achaians’ ships and their shelters
holding up in his heavy hand the great colored mantle,
and stood beside the black huge-hollowed ship of Odysseus,
which lay in the midmost, so that he could call out to both sides,
either toward the shelters of Telamonian Aias,
225 or toward Achilleus, since these two had drawn their balanced ships up
at the utter ends, sure of the strength of their hands and their courage.
He lifted his voice and called in a piercing cry to the Danaäns:

“Shame, you Argives, poor nonentities splendid to look on.
Where are our high words gone, when we said that we were the
bravest?
230 those words you spoke before all in hollow vaunting at Lemnos
when you were filled with abundant meat of the high-horned oxen
and drank from the great bowls filled to the brim with wine, how each
man
could stand up against a hundred or even two hundred Trojans
in the fighting; now we together cannot match one of them,
235 Hektor, who must presently kindle our ships with the hot fire.
Father Zeus, is it one of our too strong kings you have stricken
in this disaster now, and stripped him of his high honor?
For I say that never did I pass by your fair-wrought altar
in my benched ships when I came here on this desperate journey;
240 but on all altars I burned the fat and the thighs of oxen
in my desire to sack the strong-walled city of the Trojans.
Still, Zeus, bring to pass at least this thing that I pray for.
Let our men at least get clear and escape, and let not
the Achaians be thus beaten down at the hands of the Trojans.”

245

He spoke thus, and as he wept the father took pity upon him
and bent his head, that the people should stay alive, and not perish.
Straightway he sent down the most lordly of birds, an eagle,
with a fawn, the young of the running deer, caught in his talons,
who cast down the fawn beside Zeus’ splendid altar
250 where the Achaians wrought their devotions to Zeus of the Voices.
They, when they saw the bird and knew it was Zeus who sent it,
remembered once again their warcraft, and turned on the Trojans.
Then, many as the Danaäns were, there was no man among them
could claim he held his fast horses ahead of the son of Tydeus
255 to drive them once more across the ditch and fight at close quarters,
but he was far the first to kill a chief man of the Trojans,
Phradmon’s son, Agelaos, as he turned his team to escape him.
For in his back even as he was turning the spear fixed

between the shoulders and was driven on through the chest beyond it.
260 He fell from the chariot, and his armor clattered upon him.
After him came the Atreidai, Menelaos and Agamemnon,
and the two Aiantes gathering their fierce strength about them,
and with them Idomeneus and Idomeneus’ companion
Meriones, a match for the murderous lord of battles,
265 and after these Eurypylos, the glorious son of Euaimon;
and ninth came Teukros, bending into position the curved bow,
and took his place in the shelter of Telamonian Aias’
shield, as Aias lifted the shield to take him. The hero
would watch, whenever in the throng he had struck some man with an
arrow,
270 and as the man dropped and died where he was stricken, the archer
would run back again, like a child to the arms of his mother,
to Aias, who would hide him in the glittering shield’s protection.
Then which of the Trojans first did Teukros the blameless strike
down?
Orsilochos first of all, and Ormenos, and Ophelestes,
275 Daitor and Chromios, and Lykophontes the godlike,
and Amopaon, Polyaimon’s son, and Melanippos.
All these he felled to the bountiful earth in close succession.
Agamemnon the lord of men was glad as he watched him
laying waste from the strong bow the Trojan battalions;
280 he went over and stood beside him and spoke a word to him:
“Telamonian Teukros, dear heart, O lord of your people,
strike so; thus you may be a light given to the Danaäns,
and to Telamon your father, who cherished you when you were little,
and, bastard as you were, looked after you in his own house.
285 Bring him into glory, though he is far away; and for my part,
I will tell you this, and it will be a thing accomplished:
if ever Zeus who holds the aegis and Athene grant me
to sack outright the strong-founded citadel of Ilion,
first after myself I will put into your hands some great gift
290 of honor; a tripod, or two horses and the chariot with them,
or else a woman, who will go up into the same bed with you.”

Then in answer to him again spoke Teukros the blameless:
“Son of Atreus, most lordly: must you then drive me, who am eager
myself, as it is? Never, so far as the strength is in me,
295 have I stopped, since we began driving the Trojans back upon Ilion;
since then I have been lurking here with my bow, to strike down
fighters. And by this I have shot eight long-flanged arrows,
and all of them were driven into the bodies of young men,
fighters; yet still I am not able to hit this mad dog.”

300

He spoke, and let fly another shaft from the bowstring,
straight for Hektor, and all his heart was straining to hit him;
but missed his man, and struck down instead a strong son of Priam,
Gorgythion the blameless, hit in the chest by an arrow;
Gorgythion whose mother was lovely Kastianeira,
305 Priam’s bride from Aisyme, with the form of a goddess.
He bent drooping his head to one side, as a garden poppy
bends beneath the weight of its yield and the rains of springtime;
so his head bent slack to one side beneath the helm’s weight.
But Teukros now let fly another shaft from the bowstring,
310 straight for Hektor, and all his heart was straining to hit him,
yet missed his man once again as Apollo faltered his arrow,
and struck Archeptolemos, bold charioteer of Hektor,
in the chest next to the nipple as he charged into the fighting.
He fell out of the chariot, and the fast-footed horses
315 shied away. And there his life and his strength were scattered.
And bitter sorrow closed over Hektor’s heart for his driver,
yet grieving as he did for his friend he left him to lie there,
and called to his brother Kebriones who stood near to take up
the reins of the horses, nor did he disobey him. But Hektor
320 himself vaulted down to the ground from the shining chariot
crying a terrible cry and in his hand caught up a great stone,
and went straight for Teukros, heart urgent to hit him. Now Teukros
had drawn a bitter arrow out of his quiver, and laid it
along the bowstring, but as he drew the shaft by his shoulder,

325 there where between neck and chest the collar-bone interposes,
and this is a spot most mortal; in this place shining-helmed Hektor
struck him in all his fury with the jagged boulder, smashing
the sinew, and all his arm at the wrist was deadened.
He dropped to one knee and stayed, and the bow fell from his hand.
Aias
330 was not forgetful of his fallen brother, but running
stood bestriding him and covered him under the great shield.
Thereon Mekisteus, son of Echios, and brilliant Alastor,
two staunch companions, stooping beneath it, caught up Teukros
and carried him, groaning heavily, to the hollow vessels.

335

Now once again the Olympian filled the Trojans with fury
and they piled the Achaians straight backward against the deep ditch,
as Hektor ranged in their foremost ranks in the pride of his great
strength.
As when some hunting hound in the speed of his feet pursuing
a wild boar or a lion snaps from behind at his quarters
340 or flanks, but watches for the beast to turn upon him, so Hektor
followed close on the heels of the flowing-haired Achaians,
killing ever the last of the men; and they fled in terror.
But after they had crossed back over the ditch and the sharp stakes
in flight, and many had gone down under the hands of the Trojans,
345 they reined in and stood fast again beside their ships, calling
aloud upon each other, and to all of the gods uplifting
their hands each man of them cried out his prayers in a great voice,
while Hektor, wearing the stark eyes of a Gorgon, or murderous
Ares, wheeled about at the edge his bright-maned horses.
350 Now seeing them the goddess of the white arms, Hera, took pity
and immediately she spoke to Pallas Athene her winged words:
“For shame, daughter of Zeus who wears the aegis! No longer
shall we care for the Danaäns in their uttermost hour of destruction?
These must then fill out an evil destiny, and perish
355 in the wind of one man’s fury where none can stand now against him,

Hektor, Priam’s son, who has wrought so much evil already.”
Then in turn the goddess gray-eyed Athene answered her:
“Yet even this man would have his life and strength taken from him,
dying under the hands of the Argives in his own country;
360 but it is my father who is so furious in his heart of evil.
He is hard, and forever wicked; he crosses my high hopes,
nor remembers at all those many times I rescued his own son,
Herakles, when the tasks of Eurystheus were too much for his strength.
And time and again he would cry out aloud to the heavens,
365 and Zeus would send me down in speed from the sky to help him.
If in the wiliness of my heart I had had thoughts like his,
when Herakles was sent down to Hades of the Gates, to hale back
from the Kingdom of the Dark the hound of the grisly death god,
never would he have got clear of the steep-dripping Stygian water.
370 Yet now Zeus hates me, and is bent to the wishes of Thetis
who kissed his knees and stroked his chin in her hand, and entreated
that he give honor to Achilleus, the sacker of cities.
Yet time shall be when he calls me again his dear girl of the gray eyes.
So then: do you put under their harness our single-foot horses
375 while I go back into the house of Zeus, the lord of the aegis,
and arm me in my weapons of war. So shall I discover
whether the son of Priam, Hektor of the shining helmet,
will feel joy to see us apparent on the outworks of battle,
or see if some Trojan give the dogs and the birds their desire
380 with fat and flesh, struck down beside the ships of the Achaians.”
She spoke, nor failed to persuade the goddess Hera of the white arms.
And she, Hera, exalted goddess, daughter of Kronos
the mighty, went away to harness the gold-bridled horses.
Now in turn Athene, daughter of Zeus of the aegis,
385 beside the threshold of her father slipped off her elaborate
dress which she herself had wrought with her hands’ patience,
and now assuming the war tunic of Zeus who gathers
the clouds, she armed herself in her gear for the dismal fighting.
She set her feet in the blazing chariot, and took up a spear,
390 heavy, huge, thick, wherewith she beats down the battalions of fighting

men, against whom she of the mighty father is angered.
Hera laid the lash swiftly on the horses; and moving
of themselves groaned the gates of the sky that the Hours guarded,
those Hours to whose charge is given the huge sky and Olympos
395 to open up the dense darkness or again to close it.
Through the way between they held the speed of their goaded horses.
But Zeus father, watching from Ida, was angered terribly
and stirred Iris of the golden wings to run with his message:
“Go forth, Iris the swift, turn them back again, let them not reach me,
400 since we would close in fighting thus that would be unseemly.
For I will say this straight out, and it will be a thing accomplished:
I will lame beneath the harness their fast-running horses,
and hurl the gods from the driver’s place, and smash their chariot;
and not in the circle of ten returning years shall they be whole
405 of the wounds where the stroke of the lightning hits them; so that
the gray-eyed goddess may know when it is her father she fights with.
Yet with Hera I am not so angry, neither indignant,
since it is ever her way to cross the commands that I give her.”
He spoke, and Iris, storm-footed, rose with his message
410 and took her way from the peaks of Ida to tall Olympos,
and at the utmost gates of many-folded Olympos
met and stayed them, and spoke the word that Zeus had given her:
“Where so furious? How can your hearts so storm within you?
The son of Kronos will not let you stand by the Argives.
415 Since Zeus has uttered this threat and will make it a thing
accomplished:
that he will lame beneath the harness your fast-running horses,
and hurl yourselves from the driver’s place, and smash your chariot;
and not in the circle of ten returning years would you be whole
of the wounds where the stroke of the lightning hits you; so that
420 you may know, gray-eyed goddess, when it is your father you fight
with.
Yes, you, bold brazen wench, are audacious indeed, if truly
you dare to lift up your gigantic spear in the face of your father.
Yet with Hera he is not so angry, neither indignant,
since it is ever her way to cross the commands he gives her.”

425

So Iris the swift-footed spoke and went away from them,
and now Hera spoke a word to Pallas Athene:
“Alas, daughter of Zeus of the aegis: I can no longer
let us fight in the face of Zeus for the sake of mortals.
Let one of them perish then, let another live, as their fortune
430 wills; let him, as is his right and as his heart pleases,
work out whatever decrees he will on Danaäns and Trojans.”
So she spoke, and turned back again her single-foot horses,
and the Hours set free their flowing-maned horses from the harness,
and tethered them at their mangers that were piled with ambrosia
435 and leaned the chariot against the shining inward wall. Meanwhile
the goddesses themselves took their place on the golden couches
among the other immortals, their hearts deep grieving within them.
Now father Zeus steered back from Ida his strong-wheeled chariot
and horses to Olympos, and came among the gods’ sessions,
440 while for him the famed shaker of the earth set free his horses,
and put the chariot on its stand, with a cloth spread over it.
Then Zeus himself of the wide brows took his place on the golden
throne, as underneath his feet tall Olympos was shaken.
These two alone, Hera and Athene, stayed seated apart aside
445 from Zeus, and would not speak to him, nor ask him a question;
but he knew the whole matter within his heart, and spoke to them.
“Why then are you two sorrowful, Athene and Hera?
Surely in the battle where men win glory you were not wearied
out, destroying those Trojans on whom you have set your grim wrath.
450 In the whole account, such is my strength and my hand so invincible,
not all the gods who are on Olympos could turn me backward,
but before this the trembling took hold of your shining bodies,
before you could look upon the fighting and war’s work of sorrow;
for I will say straight out, and it would now be a thing accomplished:
455 once hit in your car by the lightning stroke you could never
have come back to Olympos, where is the place of the immortals.”
So he spoke; and Athene and Hera muttered, since they were
sitting close to each other, devising evil for the Trojans.
Still Athene stayed silent and said nothing, but only

460 sulked at Zeus her father, and savage anger took hold of her.
But the heart of Hera could not contain her anger, and she spoke forth:
“Majesty, son of Kronos, what sort of thing have you spoken?
We know well already your strength, how it is no small thing.
Yet even so we are sorrowful for the Danaän spearmen
465 who must fill out an unhappy destiny, and perish.
Still we shall keep out of the fighting, as you command us;
yet we will put good counsel in the Argives, if it may help them;
so that not all of them will die because of your anger.”
Zeus who gathers the clouds spoke to her again in answer:
470 “Tomorrow at the dawning, lady Hera of the ox eyes,
you will see, if you have the heart, a still mightier son of Kronos
perishing the ranged numbers of Argive spearmen.
For Hektor the huge will not sooner be stayed from his fighting
until there stirs by the ships the swift-footed son of Peleus
475 on that day when they shall fight by the sterns of the beached ships
in the narrow place of necessity over fallen Patroklos.
This is the way it is fated to be; and for you and your anger
I care not; not if you stray apart to the undermost limits
of earth and sea, where Iapetos and Kronos seated
480 have no shining of the sun god Hyperion to delight them
nor winds’ delight, but Tartaros stands deeply about them;
not even if you reach that place in your wandering shall I
care for your sulks; since there is nothing more shameless than you
are.”
So he spoke, and Hera of the white arms gave him no answer.
485 And now the shining light of the sun was dipped in the Ocean
trailing black night across the grain-giving land. For the Trojans
the daylight sank against their will, but for the Achaians
sweet and thrice-supplicated was the coming on of the dark night.
Now glorious Hektor held an assembly of all the Trojans,
490 taking them aside from the ships, by a swirling river
on clean ground, where there showed a space not cumbered with
corpses.

They stepped to the ground from behind their horses and listened to
Hektor
the loved of Zeus, and the words he spoke to them. He in his hand held
the eleven-cubit-long spear, whose shaft was tipped with a shining
495 bronze spearhead, and a ring of gold was hooped to hold it.
Leaning upon this spear he spoke his words to the Trojans:
“Trojans and Dardanians and companions in arms: hear me.
Now I had thought that, destroying the ships and all the Achaians,
we might take our way back once more to windy Ilion,
500 but the darkness came too soon, and this beyond all else rescued
the Argives and their vessels along the beach where the sea breaks.
But now let us give way to black night’s persuasion; let us
make ready our evening meal, and as for your flowing-maned horses,
set them free from their harness, and cast down fodder before them.
505 And lead forth also out of the city oxen and fat sheep
in all speed, and convey out also the kindly sweet wine
with food out of our houses. And heap many piles of firewood,
so that all night long and until the young dawn appears
we may burn many fires, and the glare go up into heaven;
510 so that not in the night-time the flowing-haired Achaians
may set out to run for home over the sea’s wide ridges.
No: not thus in their own good time must they take to their vessels,
but in such a way that a man of them at home will still nurse
his wound, the place where he has been hit with an arrow or sharp
spear
515 springing to his ship; so that another may shrink hereafter
from bringing down fearful war on the Trojans, breakers of horses.
And let the heralds Zeus loves give orders about the city
for the boys who are in their first youth and the gray-browed elders
to take stations on the god-founded bastions that circle the city;
520 and as for the women, have our wives, each one in her own house,
kindle a great fire; let there be a watch kept steadily
lest a sudden attack get into the town when the fighters have left it.
Let it be thus, high-hearted men of Troy, as I tell you.
Let that word that has been spoken now be a strong one,
525 with that which I speak at dawn to the Trojans, breakers of horses.

For in good hope I pray to Zeus and the other immortals
that we may drive from our place these dogs swept into destruction
whom the spirits of death have carried here on their black ships.
Now for the night we shall keep watch on ourselves, and tomorrow
530 early, before dawn shows, shall arm ourselves in our weapons
and beside their hollow vessels waken the bitter war god;
and I shall know if the son of Tydeus, strong Diomedes,
will force me back from the ships against the wall, or whether I
shall cut him down with the bronze and take home the blooded warspoils.
535 Tomorrow he will learn his own strength, if he can stand up to
my spear’s advance; but sooner than this, I think, in the foremost
he will go down under the stroke, and many companions about him
as the sun goes up into tomorrow. Oh, if I only
could be as this in all my days immortal and ageless
540 and be held in honor as Athene and Apollo are honored
as surely as this oncoming day brings evil to the Argives.”
So Hektor spoke among them, and the Trojans shouted approval.
And they set free their sweating horses from under the harness
and tethered them by the reins, each one by his own chariot.
545 They led forth also out of the city oxen and fat sheep
in all speed, and conveyed out also the kindly sweet wine,
with food out of their houses, and heaped many piles of firewood.
They accomplished likewise full sacrifices before the immortals,
and the winds wafted the savor aloft from the plain to the heavens
550 in its fragrance; and yet the blessed gods took no part of it.
They would not; so hateful to them was sacred Ilion,
and Priam, and the city of Priam of the strong ash spear.
So with hearts made high these sat night-long by the outworks
of battle, and their watchfires blazed numerous about them.
555 As when in the sky the stars about the moon’s shining
are seen in all their glory, when the air has fallen to stillness,
and all the high places of the hills are clear, and the shoulders outjutting,
and the deep ravines, as endless bright air spills from the heavens

and all the stars are seen, to make glad the heart of the shepherd;
560 such in their numbers blazed the watchfires the Trojans were burning
between the waters of Xanthos and the ships, before Ilion.
A thousand fires were burning there in the plain, and beside each
one sat fifty men in the flare of the blazing firelight.
And standing each beside his chariot, champing white barley
565 and oats, the horses waited for the dawn to mount to her high place.

BOOK NINE

5

10

15

20

25

So the Trojans held their night watches. Meanwhile immortal
Panic, companion of cold Terror, gripped the Achaians
as all their best were stricken with grief that passes endurance.
As two winds rise to shake the sea where the fish swarm, Boreas
and Zephyros, north wind and west, that blow from Thraceward,
suddenly descending, and the darkened water is gathered
to crests, and far across the salt water scatters the seaweed,
so the heart in the breast of each Achaian was troubled.
And the son of Atreus, stricken at heart with the great sorrow,
went among his heralds the clear-spoken and told them
to summon calling by name each man into the assembly
but with no outcry, and he himself was at work with the foremost.
They took their seats in assembly, dispirited, and Agamemnon
stood up before them, shedding tears, like a spring dark-running
that down the face of a rock impassable drips its dim water.
So, groaning heavily, Agamemnon spoke to the Argives:
“Friends, who are leaders of the Argives and keep their counsel:
Zeus son of Kronos has caught me badly in bitter futility.
He is hard: who before this time promised me and consented
that I might sack strong-walled Ilion and sail homeward.
Now he has devised a vile deception and bids me go back
to Argos in dishonor having lost many of my people.
Such is the way it will be pleasing to Zeus, who is too strong,
who before now has broken the crests of many cities
and will break them again, since his power is beyond all others.
Come then, do as I say, let us all be won over; let us
run away with our ships to the beloved land of our fathers

30

35

40

45

50

55

60

since no longer now shall we capture Troy of the wide ways.”
So he spoke, and all of them stayed stricken to silence.
For some time the sons of the Achaians said nothing in sorrow;
but at long last Diomedes of the great war cry addressed them:
“Son of Atreus: I will be first to fight with your folly,
as is my right, lord, in this assembly; then do not be angered.
I was the first of the Danaäns whose valor you slighted
and said I was unwarlike and without courage. The young men
of the Argives know all these things, and the elders know it.
The son of devious-devising Kronos has given you
gifts in two ways: with the scepter he gave you honor beyond all,
but he did not give you a heart, and of all power this is the greatest.
Sir, sir, can you really believe the sons of the Achaians
are so unwarlike and so weak of their hearts as you call them?
But if in truth your own heart is so set upon going,
go. The way is there, and next to the water are standing
your ships that came—so many of them!—with you from Mykenai,
and yet the rest of the flowing-haired Achaians will stay here
until we have sacked the city of Troy; let even these also
run away with their ships to the beloved land of their fathers,
still we two, Sthenelos and I, will fight till we witness
the end of Ilion; for it was with God that we made our way hither.”
So he spoke, and all the sons of the Achaians shouted
acclaim for the word of Diomedes, breaker of horses.
And now Nestor the horseman stood forth among them and spoke to
them:
“Son of Tydeus, beyond others you are strong in battle,
and in counsel also are noblest among all men of your own age.
Not one man of all the Achaians will belittle your words nor
speak against them. Yet you have not made complete your argument,
since you are a young man still and could even be my own son
and my youngest born of all; yet still you argue in wisdom
with the Argive kings, since all you have spoken was spoken fairly.
But let me speak, since I can call myself older than you are,
and go through the whole matter, since there is none who can dishonor
the thing I say, not even powerful Agamemnon.

Out of all brotherhood, outlawed, homeless shall be that man
who longs for all the horror of fighting among his own people.
65 But now let us give way to the darkness of night, and let us
make ready our evening meal; and let the guards severally
take their stations by the ditch we have dug outside the ramparts.
This I would enjoin upon our young men; but thereafter
do you, son of Atreus, take command, since you are our kingliest.
70 Divide a feast among the princes; it befits you, it is not
unbecoming. Our shelters are filled with wine that the Achaian
ships carry day by day from Thrace across the wide water.
All hospitality is for you; you are lord over many.
When many assemble together follow him who advises
75 the best counsel, for in truth there is need for all the Achaians
of good close counsel, since now close to our ships the enemy
burn their numerous fires. What man could be cheered to see this?
Here is the night that will break our army, or else will preserve it.”
So he spoke, and they listened hard to him, and obeyed him,
80 and the sentries went forth rapidly in their armor, gathering
about Nestor’s son Thrasymedes, shepherd of the people,
and about Askalaphos and Ialmenos, sons both of Ares,
about Meriones and Aphareus and Deïpyros
and about the son of Kreion, Lykomedes the brilliant.
85 There were seven leaders of the sentinels, and with each one a hundred
fighting men followed gripping in their hands the long spears.
They took position in the space between the ditch and the rampart,
and there they kindled their fires and each made ready his supper.
But the son of Atreus led the assembled lords of the Achaians
90 to his own shelter, and set before them the feast in abundance.
They put their hands to the good things that lay ready before them.
But when they had put away their desire for eating and drinking,
the aged man began to weave his counsel before them
first, Nestor, whose advice had shown best before this.
95 He in kind intention toward all stood forth and addressed them:
“Son of Atreus, most lordly and king of men, Agamemnon,

with you I will end, with you I will make my beginning, since you
are lord over many people, and Zeus has given into your hand
the scepter and rights of judgment, to be king over the people.
100 It is yours therefore to speak a word, yours also to listen,
and grant the right to another also, when his spirit stirs him
to speak for our good. All shall be yours when you lead the way. Still
I will speak in the way it seems best to my mind, and no one
shall have in his mind any thought that is better than this one
105 that I have in my mind either now or long before now
ever since that day, illustrious, when you went from the shelter
of angered Achilleus, taking by force the girl Briseis
against the will of the rest of us, since I for my part
urged you strongly not to, but you, giving way to your proud heart’s
110 anger, dishonored a great man, one whom the immortals
honor, since you have taken his prize and keep it. But let us
even now think how we can make this good and persuade him
with words of supplication and with the gifts of friendship.”
Then in turn the lord of men Agamemnon spoke to him:
115 “Aged sir, this was no lie when you spoke of my madness.
I was mad, I myself will not deny it. Worth many
fighters is that man whom Zeus in his heart loves, as now
he has honored this man and beaten down the Achaian people.
But since I was mad, in the persuasion of my heart’s evil,
120 I am willing to make all good, and give back gifts in abundance.
Before you all I will count off my gifts in their splendor:
seven unfired tripods; ten talents’ weight of gold; twenty
shining cauldrons; and twelve horses, strong, race-competitors
who have won prizes in the speed of their feet. That man would not be
125 poor in possessions, to whom were given all these have won me,
nor be unpossessed of dearly honored gold, were he given
all the prizes these single-foot horses have won for me.
I will give him seven women of Lesbos, the work of whose hands is
blameless, whom when he himself captured strong-founded Lesbos
130 I chose, and who in their beauty surpassed the races of women.
I will give him these, and with them shall go the one I took from him,
the daughter of Briseus. And to all this I will swear a great oath

that I never entered into her bed and never lay with her
as is natural for human people, between men and women.
135 All these gifts shall be his at once; but again, if hereafter
the gods grant that we storm and sack the great city of Priam,
let him go to his ship and load it deep as he pleases
with gold and bronze, when we Achaians divide the war spoils,
and let him choose for himself twenty of the Trojan women
140 who are the loveliest of all after Helen of Argos.
And if we come back to Achaian Argos, pride of the tilled land,
he may be my son-in-law; I will honor him with Orestes
my growing son, who is brought up there in abundant luxury.
Since, as I have three daughters there in my strong-built castle,
145 Chrysothemis and Laodikē and Iphianassa,
let him lead away the one of these that he likes, with no bride-price,
to the house of Peleus, and with the girl I will grant him as dowry
many gifts, such as no man ever gave with his daughter.
I will grant to him seven citadels, strongly settled:
150 Kardamyle, and Enopē, and Hire of the grasses,
Pherai the sacrosanct, and Antheia deep in the meadows,
with Aipeia the lovely and Pedasos of the vineyards.
All these lie near the sea, at the bottom of sandy Pylos,
and men live among them rich in cattle and rich in sheepflocks,
155 who will honor him as if he were a god with gifts given
and fulfill his prospering decrees underneath his scepter.
All this I will bring to pass for him, if he changes from his anger.
Let him give way. For Hades gives not way, and is pitiless,
and therefore he among all the gods is most hateful to mortals.
160 And let him yield place to me, inasmuch as I am the kinglier
and inasmuch as I can call myself born the elder.”
Thereupon the Gerenian horseman Nestor answered him:
“Son of Atreus, most lordly and king of men, Agamemnon,
none could scorn any longer these gifts you offer to Achilleus
165 the king. Come, let us choose and send some men, who in all speed
will go to the shelter of Achilleus, the son of Peleus;
or come, the men on whom my eye falls, let these take the duty.
First of all let Phoinix, beloved of Zeus, be their leader,

and after him take Aias the great, and brilliant Odysseus,
170 and of the heralds let Odios and Eurybates go with them.
Bring also water for their hands, and bid them keep words of good
omen,
so we may pray to Zeus, son of Kronos, if he will have pity.”
So he spoke, and the word he spoke was pleasing to all of them.
And the heralds brought water at once, and poured it over
175 their hands, and the young men filled the mixing bowl with pure wine
and passed it to all, pouring first a libation in goblets.
Then when they had poured out wine, and drunk as much as their hearts
wished,
they set out from the shelter of Atreus’ son, Agamemnon.
And the Gerenian horseman Nestor gave them much instruction,
180 looking eagerly at each, and most of all at Odysseus,
to try hard, so that they might win over the blameless Peleion.
So these two walked along the strand of the sea deep-thundering
with many prayers to the holder and shaker of the earth, that they
might readily persuade the great heart of Aiakides.
185 Now they came beside the shelters and ships of the Myrmidons
and they found Achilleus delighting his heart in a lyre, clear-sounding,
splendid and carefully wrought, with a bridge of silver upon it,
which he won out of the spoils when he ruined Eëtions city.
With this he was pleasuring his heart, and singing of men’s fame,
190 as Patroklos was sitting over against him, alone, in silence,
watching Aiakides and the time he would leave off singing.
Now these two came forward, as brilliant Odysseus led them,
and stood in his presence. Achilleus rose to his feet in amazement
holding the lyre as it was, leaving the place where he was sitting.
195 In the same way Patroklos, when he saw the men come, stood up.
And in greeting Achilleus the swift of foot spoke to them:
“Welcome. You are my friends who have come, and greatly I need you,
who even to this my anger are dearest of all the Achaians.”
So brilliant Achilleus spoke, and guided them forward,
200 and caused them to sit down on couches with purple coverlets
and at once called over to Patroklos who was not far from him:

“Son of Menoitios, set up a mixing bowl that is bigger,
and mix us stronger drink, and make ready a cup for each man,
since these who have come beneath my roof are the men that I love
best.”

205 So he spoke, and Patroklos obeyed his beloved companion,
and tossed down a great chopping-block into the firelight,
and laid upon it the back of a sheep, and one of a fat goat,
with the chine of a fatted pig edged thick with lard, and for him
Automedon held the meats, and brilliant Achilleus carved them,
210 and cut it well into pieces and spitted them, as meanwhile
Menoitios’ son, a man like a god, made the fire blaze greatly.
But when the fire had burned itself out, and the flames had died down,
he scattered the embers apart, and extended the spits across them
lifting them to the andirons, and sprinkled the meats with divine salt.
215 Then when he had roasted all, and spread the food on the platters,
Patroklos took the bread and set it out on a table
in fair baskets, while Achilleus served the meats. Thereafter
he himself sat over against the godlike Odysseus
against the further wall, and told his companion, Patroklos,
220 to sacrifice to the gods; and he threw the firstlings in the fire.
They put their hands to the good things that lay ready before them.
But when they had put aside their desire for eating and drinking,
Aias nodded to Phoinix, and brilliant Odysseus saw it,
and filled a cup with wine, and lifted it to Achilleus:
225 “Your health, Achilleus. You have no lack of your equal portion
either within the shelter of Atreus’ son, Agamemnon,
nor here now in your own. We have good things in abundance
to feast on; here it is not the desirable feast we think of,
but a trouble all too great, beloved of Zeus, that we look on
230 and are afraid. There is doubt if we save our strong-benched vessels
or if they will be destroyed, unless you put on your war strength.
The Trojans in their pride, with their far-renowned companions,
have set up an encampment close by the ships and the rampart,

and lit many fires along their army, and think no longer
235 of being held, but rather to drive in upon the black ships.
And Zeus, son of Kronos, lightens upon their right hand, showing them
portents of good, while Hektor in the huge pride of his strength rages
irresistibly, reliant on Zeus, and gives way to no one,
neither god nor man, but the strong fury has descended upon him.
240 He prays now that the divine Dawn will show most quickly,
since he threatens to shear the uttermost horns from the ship-sterns,
to light the ships themselves with ravening fire, and to cut down
the Achaians themselves as they stir from the smoke beside them.
All this I fear terribly in my heart, lest immortals
245 accomplish all these threats, and lest for us it be destiny
to die here in Troy, far away from horse-pasturing Argos.
Up, then! if you are minded, late though it be, to rescue
the afflicted sons of the Achaians from the Trojan onslaught.
It will be an affliction to you hereafter, there will be no remedy
250 found to heal the evil thing when it has been done. No, beforehand
take thought to beat the evil day aside from the Danaäns.
Dear friend, surely thus your father Peleus advised you
that day when he sent you away to Agamemnon from Phthia:
‘My child, for the matter of strength, Athene and Hera will give it
255 if it be their will, but be it yours to hold fast in your bosom
the anger of the proud heart, for consideration is better.
Keep from the bad complication of quarrel, and all the more for this
the Argives will honor you, both their younger men and their elders.
’ So the old man advised, but you have forgotten. Yet even now
260 stop, and give way from the anger that hurts the heart. Agamemnon
offers you worthy recompense if you change from your anger.
Come then, if you will, listen to me, while I count off for you
all the gifts in his shelter that Agamemnon has promised:
Seven unfired tripods; ten talents’ weight of gold; twenty
265 shining cauldrons; and twelve horses, strong, race-competitors
who have won prizes in the speed of their feet. That man would not be
poor in possessions, to whom were given all these have won him,
nor be unpossessed of dearly honored gold, were he given
all the prizes Agamemnon’s horses won in their speed for him.

270 He will give you seven women of Lesbos, the work of whose hands
is blameless, whom when you yourself captured strong-founded Lesbos
he chose, and who in their beauty surpassed the races of women.
He will give you these, and with them shall go the one he took from
you,
the daughter of Briseus. And to all this he will swear a great oath
275 that he never entered into her bed and never lay with her
as is natural for human people, between men and women.
All these gifts shall be yours at once; but again, if hereafter
the gods grant that we storm and sack the great city of Priam,
you may go to your ship and load it deep as you please with
280 gold and bronze, when we Achaians divide the war spoils,
and you may choose for yourself twenty of the Trojan women,
who are the loveliest of all after Helen of Argos.
And if we come back to Achaian Argos, pride of the tilled land,
you could be his son-in-law; he would honor you with Orestes,
285 his growing son, who is brought up there in abundant luxury.
Since, as he has three daughters there in his strong-built castle,
Chrysothemis and Laodikē and Iphianassa,
you may lead away the one of these that you like, with no bride-price,
to the house of Peleus; and with the girl he will grant you as dowry
290 many gifts, such as no man ever gave with his daughter.
He will grant you seven citadels, strongly settled:
Kardamyle and Enopē and Hire of the grasses,
Pherai the sacrosanct, and Antheia deep in the meadows,
with Aipeia the lovely, and Pedasos of the vineyards.
295 All these lie near the sea, at the bottom of sandy Pylos,
and men live among them rich in cattle and rich in sheepflocks,
who will honor you as if you were a god with gifts given
and fulfill your prospering decrees underneath your scepter.
All this he will bring to pass for you, if you change from your anger.
300 But if the son of Atreus is too much hated in your heart,
himself and his gifts, at least take pity on all the other
Achaians, who are afflicted along the host, and will honor you
as a god. You may win very great glory among them.
For now you might kill Hektor, since he would come very close to you

305 with the wicked fury upon him, since he thinks there is not his equal
among the rest of the Danaäns the ships carried hither.”
Then in answer to him spoke Achilleus of the swift feet:
“Son of Laërtes and seed of Zeus, resourceful Odysseus:
without consideration for you I must make my answer,
310 the way I think, and the way it will be accomplished, that you may not
come one after another, and sit by me, and speak softly.
For as I detest the doorways of Death, I detest that man, who
hides one thing in the depths of his heart, and speaks forth another.
But I will speak to you the way it seems best to me: neither
315 do I think the son of Atreus, Agamemnon, will persuade me,
nor the rest of the Danaäns, since there was no gratitude given
for fighting incessantly forever against your enemies.
Fate is the same for the man who holds back, the same if he fights hard.
We are all held in a single honor, the brave with the weaklings.
320 A man dies still if he has done nothing, as one who has done much.
Nothing is won for me, now that my heart has gone through its
afflictions
in forever setting my life on the hazard of battle.
For as to her unwinged young ones the mother bird brings back
morsels, wherever she can find them, but as for herself it is suffering,
325 such was I, as I lay through all the many nights unsleeping,
such as I wore through the bloody days of the fighting,
striving with warriors for the sake of these men’s women.
But I say that I have stormed from my ships twelve cities
of men, and by land eleven more through the generous Troad.
330 From all these we took forth treasures, goodly and numerous,
and we would bring them back, and give them to Agamemnon,
Atreus’ son; while he, waiting back beside the swift ships,
would take them, and distribute them little by little, and keep many.
All the other prizes of honor he gave the great men and the princes
335 are held fast by them, but from me alone of all the Achaians
he has taken and keeps the bride of my heart. Let him lie beside her
and be happy. Yet why must the Argives fight with the Trojans?
And why was it the son of Atreus assembled and led here

these people? Was it not for the sake of lovely-haired Helen?
340 Are the sons of Atreus alone among mortal men the ones
who love their wives? Since any who is a good man, and careful,
loves her who is his own and cares for her, even as I now
loved this one from my heart, though it was my spear that won her.
Now that he has deceived me and taken from my hands my prize of
honor,
345 let him try me no more. I know him well. He will not persuade me.
Let him take counsel with you, Odysseus, and the rest of the princes
how to fight the ravening fire away from his vessels.
Indeed, there has been much hard work done even without me;
he has built himself a wall and driven a ditch about it,
350 making it great and wide, and fixed the sharp stakes inside it.
Yet even so he cannot hold the strength of manslaughtering
Hektor; and yet when I was fighting among the Achaians
Hektor would not drive his attack beyond the wall’s shelter
but would come forth only so far as the Skaian gates and the oak tree.
355 There once he endured me alone, and barely escaped my onslaught.
But, now I am unwilling to fight against brilliant Hektor;
tomorrow, when I have sacrificed to Zeus and to all gods,
and loaded well my ships, and rowed out onto the salt water,
you will see, if you have a mind to it and if it concerns you,
360 my ships in the dawn at sea on the Hellespont where the fish swarm
and my men manning them with good will to row. If the glorious
shaker of the earth should grant us a favoring passage
on the third day thereafter we might raise generous Phthia.
I have many possessions there that I left behind when I came here
365 on this desperate venture, and from here there is more gold, and red
bronze,
and fair-girdled women, and gray iron I will take back;
all that was allotted to me. But my prize: he who gave it,
powerful Agamemnon, son of Atreus, has taken it back again
outrageously. Go back and proclaim to him all that I tell you,
370 openly, so other Achaians may turn against him in anger
if he hopes yet one more time to swindle some other Danaän,
wrapped as he is forever in shamelessness; yet he would not,

bold as a dog though he be, dare look in my face any longer.
I will join with him in no counsel, and in no action.
375 He cheated me and he did me hurt. Let him not beguile me
with words again. This is enough for him. Let him of his own will
be damned, since Zeus of the counsels has taken his wits away from
him.
I hate his gifts. I hold him light as the strip of a splinter.
Not if he gave me ten times as much, and twenty times over
380 as he possesses now, not if more should come to him from elsewhere,
or gave all that is brought in to Orchomenos, all that is brought in
to Thebes of Egypt, where the greatest possessions lie up in the houses,
Thebes of the hundred gates, where through each of the gates two
hundred
fighting men come forth to war with horses and chariots;
385 not if he gave me gifts as many as the sand or the dust is,
not even so would Agamemnon have his way with my spirit
until he had made good to me all this heartrending insolence.
Nor will I marry a daughter of Atreus’ son, Agamemnon,
not if she challenged Aphrodite the golden for loveliness,
390 not if she matched the work of her hands with gray-eyed Athene;
not even so will I marry her; let him pick some other Achaian,
one who is to his liking and is kinglier than I am.
For if the gods will keep me alive, and I win homeward,
Peleus himself will presently arrange a wife for me.
395 There are many Achaian girls in the land of Hellas and Phthia,
daughters of great men who hold strong places in guard. And of these
any one that I please I might make my beloved lady.
And the great desire in my heart drives me rather in that place
to take a wedded wife in marriage, the bride of my fancy,
400 to enjoy with her the possessions won by aged Peleus. For not
worth the value of my life are all the possessions they fable
were won for Ilion, that strong-founded citadel, in the old days
when there was peace, before the coming of the sons of the Achaians;
not all that the stone doorsill of the Archer holds fast within it,
405 of Phoibos Apollo in Pytho of the rocks. Of possessions
cattle and fat sheep are things to be had for the lifting,

and tripods can be won, and the tawny high heads of horses,
but a man’s life cannot come back again, it cannot be lifted
nor captured again by force, once it has crossed the teeth’s barrier.
410 For my mother Thetis the goddess of the silver feet tells me
I carry two sorts of destiny toward the day of my death. Either,
if I stay here and fight beside the city of the Trojans,
my return home is gone, but my glory shall be everlasting;
but if I return home to the beloved land of my fathers,
415 the excellence of my glory is gone, but there will be a long life
left for me, and my end in death will not come to me quickly.
And this would be my counsel to others also, to sail back
home again, since no longer shall you find any term set
on the sheer city of Ilion, since Zeus of the wide brows has strongly
420 held his own hand over it, and its people are made bold.
Do you go back therefore to the great men of the Achaians,
and take them this message, since such is the privilege of the princes:
that they think out in their minds some other scheme that is better,
which might rescue their ships, and the people of the Achaians
425 who man the hollow ships, since this plan will not work for them
which they thought of by reason of my anger. Let Phoinix
remain here with us and sleep here, so that tomorrow
he may come with us in our ships to the beloved land of our fathers,
if he will; but I will never use force to hold him.”

430 So he spoke, and all of them stayed stricken to silence
in amazement at his words. He had spoken to them very strongly.
But at long last Phoinix the aged horseman spoke out
in a stormburst of tears, and fearing for the ships of the Achaians:
“If it is going home, glorious Achilleus, you ponder
435 in your heart, and are utterly unwilling to drive the obliterating
fire from the fast ships, since anger has descended on your spirit,
how then shall I, dear child, be left in this place behind you
all alone? Peleus the aged horseman sent me forth with you
on that day when he sent you from Phthia to Agamemnon

440 a mere child, who knew nothing yet of the joining of battle
nor of debate where men are made pre-eminent. Therefore
he sent me along with you to teach you of all these matters,
to make you a speaker of words and one accomplished in action.
Therefore apart from you, dear child, I would not be willing
445 to be left behind, not were the god in person to promise
he would scale away my old age and make me a young man
blossoming
as I was that time when I first left Hellas, the land of fair women,
running from the hatred of Ormenos’ son Amyntor,
my father, who hated me for the sake of a fair-haired mistress.
450 For he made love to her himself, and dishonored his own wife,
my mother; who was forever taking my knees and entreating me
to lie with this mistress instead so that she would hate the old man.
I was persuaded and did it; and my father when he heard of it
straightway
called down his curses, and invoked against me the dreaded furies
455 that I might never have any son born of my seed to dandle
on my knees; and the divinities, Zeus of the underworld
and Persephonē the honored goddess, accomplished his curses.
Then I took it into my mind to cut him down with the sharp bronze,
but some one of the immortals checked my anger, reminding me
460 of rumor among the people and men’s maledictions repeated,
that I might not be called a parricide among the Achaians.
But now no more could the heart in my breast be ruled entirely
to range still among these halls when my father was angered.
Rather it was the many kinsmen and cousins about me
465 who held me closed in the house, with supplications repeated,
and slaughtered fat sheep in their numbers, and shambling horn-curved
cattle, and numerous swine with the fat abundant upon them
were singed and stretched out across the flame of Hephaistos,
and much wine was drunk that was stored in the jars of the old man.
470 Nine nights they slept nightlong in their places beside me,
and they kept up an interchange of watches, and the fire was never
put out; one below the gate of the strong-closed courtyard,
and one in the ante-chamber before the doors of the bedroom.

But when the tenth night had come to me in its darkness,
475 then I broke the close-compacted doors of the chamber
and got away, and overleapt the fence of the courtyard
lightly, unnoticed by the guarding men and the women servants.
Then I fled far away through the wide spaces of Hellas
and came as far as generous Phthia, mother of sheepflocks,
480 and to lord Peleus, who accepted me with a good will
and gave me his love, even as a father loves his own son
who is a single child brought up among many possessions.
He made me a rich man, and granted me many people,
and I lived, lord over the Dolopes, in remotest Phthia,
485 and, godlike Achilleus, I made you all that you are now,
and loved you out of my heart, for you would not go with another
out to any feast, nor taste any food in your own halls
until I had set you on my knees, and cut little pieces
from the meat, and given you all you wished, and held the wine for
you.
490 And many times you soaked the shirt that was on my body
with wine you would spit up in the troublesomeness of your childhood.
So I have suffered much through you, and have had much trouble,
thinking always how the gods would not bring to birth any children
of my own; so that it was you, godlike Achilleus, I made
495 my own child, so that some day you might keep hard affliction from
me.
Then, Achilleus, beat down your great anger. It is not
yours to have a pitiless heart. The very immortals
can be moved; their virtue and honor and strength are greater than ours
are
and yet with sacrifices and offerings for endearment,
500 with libations and with savor men turn back even the immortals
in supplication, when any man does wrong and transgresses.
For there are also the spirits of Prayer, the daughters of great Zeus,
and they are lame of their feet, and wrinkled, and cast their eyes
sidelong,
who toil on their way left far behind by the spirit of Ruin:

505 but she, Ruin, is strong and sound on her feet, and therefore
far outruns all Prayers, and wins into every country
to force men astray; and the Prayers follow as healers after her.
If a man venerates these daughters of Zeus as they draw near,
such a man they bring great advantage, and hear his entreaty;
510 but if a man shall deny them, and stubbornly with a harsh word
refuse, they go to Zeus, son of Kronos, in supplication
that Ruin may overtake this man, that he be hurt, and punished.
So, Achilleus: grant, you also, that Zeus’ daughters be given
their honor, which, lordly though they be, curbs the will of others.
515 Since, were he not bringing gifts and naming still more hereafter,
Atreus’ son; were he to remain still swollen with rancor,
even I would not bid you throw your anger aside, nor
defend the Argives, though they needed you sorely. But see now,
he offers you much straightway, and has promised you more hereafter;
520 he has sent the best men to you to supplicate you, choosing them
out of the Achaian host, those who to yourself are the dearest
of all the Argives. Do not you make vain their argument
nor their footsteps, though before this one could not blame your anger.

Thus it was in the old days also, the deeds that we hear of
525 from the great men, when the swelling anger descended upon them.
The heroes would take gifts; they would listen, and be persuaded.
For I remember this action of old, it is not a new thing,
and how it went; you are all my friends, I will tell it among you.
The Kouretes and the steadfast Aitolians were fighting
530 and slaughtering one another about the city of Kalydon,
the Aitolians in lovely Kalydon’s defense, the Kouretes
furious to storm and sack it in war. For Artemis,
she of the golden chair, had driven this evil upon them,
angered that Oineus had not given the pride of the orchards
535 to her, first fruits; the rest of the gods were given due sacrifice,
but alone to this daughter of great Zeus he had given nothing.
He had forgotten, or had not thought, in his hard delusion,

and in wrath at his whole mighty line the Lady of Arrows
sent upon them the fierce wild boar with the shining teeth, who
540 after the way of his kind did much evil to the orchards of Oineus.
For he ripped up whole tall trees from the ground and scattered them
headlong
roots and all, even to the very flowers of the orchard.
The son of Oineus killed this boar, Meleagros, assembling
together many hunting men out of numerous cities
545 with their hounds; since the boar might not have been killed by a few
men,
so huge was he, and had put many men on the sad fire for burning.
But the goddess again made a great stir of anger and crying
battle, over the head of the boar and the bristling boar’s hide,
between Kouretes and the high-hearted Aitolians. So long
550 as Meleagros lover of battle stayed in the fighting
it went the worse for the Kouretes, and they could not even
hold their ground outside the wall, though they were so many.
But when the anger came upon Meleagros, such anger
as wells in the hearts of others also, though their minds are careful,
555 he, in the wrath of his heart against his own mother, Althaia,
lay apart with his wedded bride, Kleopatra the lovely,
daughter of sweet-stepping Marpessa, child of Euenos,
and Idas, who was the strongest of all men upon earth
in his time; for he even took up the bow to face the King’s onset,
560 Phoibos Apollo, for the sake of the sweet-stepping maiden;
a girl her father and honored mother had named in their palace
Alkyone, sea-bird, as a by-name, since for her sake
her mother with the sorrow-laden cry of a sea-bird
wept because far-reaching Phoibos Apollo had taken her;
565 with this Kleopatra he lay mulling his heart-sore anger,
raging by reason of his mother’s curses, which she called down
from the gods upon him, in deep grief for the death of her brother,
and many times beating with her hands on the earth abundant
she called on Hades and on honored Persephonē, lying
570 at length along the ground, and the tears were wet on her bosom,
to give death to her son; and Erinys, the mist-walking,

she of the heart without pity, heard her out of the dark places.
Presently there was thunder about the gates, and the sound rose
of towers under assault, and the Aitolian elders
575 supplicated him, sending their noblest priests of the immortals,
to come forth and defend them; they offered him a great gift:
wherever might lie the richest ground in lovely Kalydon,
there they told him to choose out a piece of land, an entirely
good one, of fifty acres, the half of it to be vineyard
580 and the half of it unworked ploughland of the plain to be furrowed.
And the aged horseman Oineus again and again entreated him,
and took his place at the threshold of the high-vaulted chamber
and shook against the bolted doors, pleading with his own son.
And again and again his honored mother and his sisters
585 entreated him, but he only refused the more; then his own friends
who were the most honored and dearest of all entreated him;
but even so they could not persuade the heart within him
until, as the chamber was under close assault, the Kouretes
were mounting along the towers and set fire to the great city.
590 And then at last his wife, the fair-girdled bride, supplicated
Meleagros, in tears, and rehearsed in their numbers before him
all the sorrows that come to men when their city is taken:
they kill the men, and the fire leaves the city in ashes,
and strangers lead the children away and the deep-girdled women.
595 And the heart, as he listened to all this evil, was stirred within him,
and he rose, and went, and closed his body in shining armor.
So he gave way in his own heart, and drove back the day of evil
from the Aitolians; yet these no longer would make good
their many and gracious gifts; yet he drove back the evil from them.
600 Listen, then; do not have such a thought in your mind; let not
the spirit within you turn you that way, dear friend. It would be worse
to defend the ships after they are burning. No, with gifts promised
go forth. The Achaians will honor you as they would an immortal.
But if without gifts you go into the fighting where men perish,
605 your honor will no longer be as great, though you drive back the
battle.”

Then in answer to him spoke Achilleus of the swift feet:
“Phoinix my father, aged, illustrious, such honor is a thing
I need not. I think I am honored already in Zeus’ ordinance
which will hold me here beside my curved ships as long as life’s wind
610 stays in my breast, as long as my knees have their spring beneath me.
And put away in your thoughts this other thing I tell you.
Stop confusing my heart with lamentation and sorrow
for the favor of great Atreides. It does not become you
to love this man, for fear you turn hateful to me, who love you.
615 It should be your pride with me to hurt whoever shall hurt me.
Be king equally with me; take half of my honor.
These men will carry back the message; you stay here and sleep here
in a soft bed, and we shall decide tomorrow, as dawn shows,
whether to go back home again or else to remain here.”

620

He spoke, and, saying nothing, nodded with his brows to Patroklos
to make up a neat bed for Phoinix, so the others might presently
think of going home from his shelter. The son of Telamon,
Aias the godlike, saw it, and now spoke his word among them:
“Son of Laërtes and seed of Zeus, resourceful Odysseus:
625 let us go. I think that nothing will be accomplished
by argument on this errand; it is best to go back quickly
and tell this story, though it is not good, to the Danaäns
who sit there waiting for us to come back, seeing that Achilleus
has made savage the proud-hearted spirit within his body.
630 He is hard, and does not remember that friends’ affection
wherein we honored him by the ships, far beyond all others.
Pitiless. And yet a man takes from his brother’s slayer
the blood price, or the price for a child who was killed, and the guilty
one, when he has largely repaid, stays still in the country,
635 and the injured man’s heart is curbed, and his pride, and his anger
when he has taken the price; but the gods put in your breast a spirit
not to be placated, bad, for the sake of one single
girl. Yet now we offer you seven, surpassingly lovely,

and much beside these. Now make gracious the spirit within you.
640 Respect your own house; see, we are under the same roof with you,
from the multitude of the Danaäns, we who desire beyond all
others to have your honor and love, out of all the Achaians.”
Then in answer to him spoke Achilleus of the swift feet:
“Son of Telamon, seed of Zeus, Aias, lord of the people:
645 all that you have said seems spoken after my own mind.
Yet still the heart in me swells up in anger, when I remember
the disgrace that he wrought upon me before the Argives,
the son of Atreus, as if I were some dishonored vagabond.
Do you then go back to him, and take him this message:
650 that I shall not think again of the bloody fighting
until such time as the son of wise Priam, Hektor the brilliant,
comes all the way to the ships of the Myrmidons, and their shelters,
slaughtering the Argives, and shall darken with fire our vessels.
But around my own shelter, I think, and beside my black ship
655 Hektor will be held, though he be very hungry for battle.”
He spoke, and they taking each a two-handled cup poured out
a libation, then went back to their ships, and Odysseus led them.
Now Patroklos gave the maids and his followers orders
to make up without delay a neat bed for Phoinix.
660 And these obeyed him and made up the bed as he had commanded,
laying fleeces on it, and a blanket, and a sheet of fine linen.
There the old man lay down and waited for the divine Dawn.
But Achilleus slept in the inward corner of the strong-built shelter,
and a woman lay beside him, one he had taken from Lesbos,
665 Phorbas’ daughter, Diomede of the fair coloring.
In the other corner Patroklos went to bed; with him also
was a girl, Iphis the fair-girdled, whom brilliant Achilleus
gave him, when he took sheer Skyros, Enyeus’ citadel.
Now when these had come back to the shelters of Agamemnon,
670 the sons of the Achaians greeted them with their gold cups
uplifted, one after another, standing, and asked them questions.
And the first to question them was the lord of men, Agamemnon:

“Tell me, honored Odysseus, great glory of the Achaians:
is he willing to fight the ravening fire away from our vessels,
675 or did he refuse, and does the anger still hold his proud heart?”
Then long-suffering great Odysseus spoke to him in answer:
“Son of Atreus, most lordly, king of men, Agamemnon.
That man will not quench his anger, but still more than ever
is filled with rage. He refuses you and refuses your presents.
680 He tells you yourself to take counsel among the Argives
how to save your ships, and the people of the Achaians.
And he himself has threatened that tomorrow as dawn shows
he will drag down his strong-benched, oarswept ships to the water.
He said it would be his counsel to others also, to sail back
685 home again, since no longer will you find any term set
on the sheer city of Ilion, since Zeus of the wide brows has strongly
held his own hand over it, and its people are made bold.
So he spoke. There are these to attest it who went there with me
also, Aias, and the two heralds, both men of good counsel.
690 But aged Phoinix stayed there for the night, as Achilleus urged him,
so he might go home in the ships to the beloved land of his fathers
if Phoinix will; but he will never use force to persuade him.”
So he spoke, and all of them stayed stricken to silence
in amazement at his words. He had spoken to them very strongly.
695 For a long time the sons of the Achaians said nothing, in sorrow,
but at long last Diomedes of the great war cry spoke to them:
“Son of Atreus, most lordly and king of men, Agamemnon,
I wish you had not supplicated the blameless son of Peleus
with innumerable gifts offered. He is a proud man without this,
700 and now you have driven him far deeper into his pride. Rather
we shall pay him no more attention, whether he comes in with us
or stays away. He will fight again, whenever the time comes
that the heart in his body urges him to, and the god drives him.
Come then, do as I say, and let us all be won over.
705 Go to sleep, now that the inward heart is made happy
with food and drink, for these are the strength and courage within us.
But when the lovely dawn shows forth with rose fingers, Atreides,

rapidly form before our ships both people and horses
stirring them on, and yourself be ready to fight in the foremost.”
710 So he spoke, and all the kings gave him their approval,
acclaiming the word of Diomedes, breaker of horses.
Then they poured a libation, and each man went to his shelter,
where they went to their beds and took the blessing of slumber.

BOOK TEN

Now beside their ships the other great men of the Achaians
slept night long, with the soft bondage of slumber upon them;
but the son of Atreus, Agamemnon, shepherd of the people,
was held by no sweet sleep as he pondered deeply within him.
5 As when the lord of Hera the lovely-haired flashes his lightning
as he brings on a great rainstorm, or a hail incessant,
or a blizzard, at such time when the snowfall scatters on ploughlands,
or drives on somewhere on earth the huge edge of tearing battle,
such was Agamemnon, with the beating turmoil in his bosom
10 from the deep heart, and all his wits were shaken within him.
Now he would gaze across the plain to the Trojan camp, wondering
at the number of their fires that were burning in front of Ilion,
toward the high calls of their flutes and pipes, the murmur of people.
Now as he would look again to the ships and the Achaian
15 people, he would drag the hair by its roots from his head, looking
toward Zeus on high, and his proud heart was stricken with
lamentation.
Now to his mind this thing appeared to be the best counsel,
first among men to seek out Nestor, the son of Neleus,
to see if Nestor with him could work out a plan that would not fail,
20 and one that might drive the evil away from all the Danaäns.
He stood upright, and slipped the tunic upon his body,
and underneath his shining feet he bound the fair sandals,
and thereafter slung across him the tawny hide of a lion
glowing and huge, that swung to his feet, and took up a spear.
25 So likewise trembling seized Menelaos, neither on his eyes
had sweet slumber descending settled, for fear that the Argives
might suffer some hurt, they who for his sake over much water

30

35

40

45

50

55

60

had come to Troy, bearing their bold attack to the Trojans.
First of all he mantled his broad back in a leopard’s
spotted hide, then lifting the circle of a brazen helmet
placed it upon his head, and took up a spear in his big hand,
and went on his way to waken his brother, who was the great king
of all Argives, one honored in his own land as a god is.
He found him putting the splendid armor about his shoulders
beside the stern of his ship, and was welcomed as he came up to him.
It was Menelaos of the great war cry who spoke first:
“Why this arming, my brother? Is it some one of your companions
you are stirring to go and spy on the Trojans? Yet I fear sadly
there will not be any man to undertake this endeavor,
going against enemy fighters to spy on them, alone, through
the immortal night. Such a man will have to be very bold-hearted.”
Then in turn powerful Agamemnon answered him:
“You and I, illustrious, O Menelaos, have need now
of crafty counsel, if any man is to defend and rescue
the Argives and their ships, since the heart of Zeus is turned from us.
For the sacrifices of Hektor have stirred his heart more than ours have.
No, for I never saw nor heard from the lips of another
of a single man in a day imagining so much evil
as Hektor, beloved of Zeus, has wrought on the sons of the Achaians,
alone, being called true son neither of a god nor a goddess.
He has done things I think the Argives will remember with sorrow
long into the future, such harm has he devised the Achaians.
But go now, running lightly beside the ships, and call to us
Idomeneus and Aias, while I shall go after Nestor
the brilliant, and waken him to rise, if he might be willing
to approach the sacred duty of the guards, or give orders to them.
Above all, these would listen to him, seeing that his own son
commands the pickets, and with him the follower of Idomeneus,
Meriones. To these above all we entrusted the duty.”
Then in turn Menelaos of the great war cry answered him:
“How then do you intend this order that you have given me?
Shall I wait where I am, with them, and watch for your coming,
or run after you, when I have properly given the order?”

Then in turn the lord of men Agamemnon spoke to him:
65 “Better wait here, so there will be no way we can miss one another
as we come and go. There are many paths up and down the
encampment.
Call out wherever you go, and waken each man to give him
your orders, naming him by descent with the name of his father.
Give each man due respect. Let not your spirit be haughty,
70 but let it be you and I ourselves who do the work, seeing
that Zeus cast on us as we were born this burden of evil.”

75

80

85

90

95

So he spoke and with careful orders sent off his brother,
and he himself went in search of Nestor, shepherd of the people,
and came on him beside his own shelter and his own black ship
in a soft bed, and his bright gear was lying beside him,
the shield, and the two spears, and the glittering helmet, and by him
lay in all its shining the war belt, in which the old man
girt himself, when he armed for the fighting where men die, leading
his own people, since he gave no ground to sorrowful old age.
He straightened up and raised his head, leaning on one elbow,
and spoke to the son of Atreus, and asked him a question:
“Who are you, who walk alone through the ships and the army
and through the darkness of night when other mortals are sleeping?
Are you looking for one of your mules, or looking for some
companion?
Speak, do not come upon me in silence. What would you of me?”
Then in turn the lord of men Agamemnon answered him:
“Nestor, son of Neleus, great glory of the Achaians,
you will know Atreus’ son Agamemnon, whom beyond others
Zeus has involved in hard work forever, as long as life’s wind
stays in my breast, as long as my knees have their spring beneath me.
I am driven thus, because the ease of sleep will not settle
on my eyes, but fighting and the cares of the Achaians perplex me.
Terribly I am in dread for the Danaäns, nor does my pulse beat
steadily, but I go distracted, and my heart is pounding
through my chest, and my shining limbs are shaken beneath me.
But if you are for action, since sleep comes neither upon you,

let us both go out to the pickets, so that we may see
if they might not have found weariness too much for them, and fallen
asleep, and altogether forgotten their duty, to keep watch.
100 There are men who hate us sitting nearby, nor do we know
that they might not be pondering an attack on us in the darkness.”
Thereupon the Gerenian horseman Nestor answered him:
“Son of Atreus, most lordly and king of men, Agamemnon,
Zeus of the counsels, I think, will not accomplish for Hektor
105 all his designs and all he hopes for now; I think rather
he will have still more hardships to wrestle, if ever Achilleus
turns again the heart within him from its wearisome anger.
Surely, I will go with you, and let us also awaken
others, the son of Tydeus the spear-famed, and Odysseus,
110 and Aias the swift-footed, and the powerful son of Phyleus.
But if one were to go also and call these others I speak of,
Aias the great, the godlike one, and the lord Idomeneus,
why, their ships lie farthest from us, and are not at all close.
But, beloved as he is and respected, I will still blame
115 Menelaos, even though you be angry, and I will not hide it,
for the way he sleeps and has given to you alone all the hard work.
For now he ought to be hard at work going to all the great men
in supplication. This need that has come is no more endurable.”
Then in turn the lord of men Agamemnon spoke to him:
120 “Aged sir, other times I also would tell you to blame him,
since often he hangs back and is not willing to work hard,
not that he shrinks from it and gives way, nor in the mind’s dullness,
but because he looks to me, and waits till I make a beginning.
But this time he woke far before me, and came to rouse me,
125 and I sent him on to call those you ask after. Therefore
let us go. We shall find those others there with the sentries
before the gates, where I told them to form and assemble.”
Thereupon the Gerenian horseman Nestor answered him:
“Thus no man of the Argives can disobey him nor find fault
130 with him, whenever he stirs up any of them and gives orders.”
With this speech, he slipped the tunic upon his body

and underneath his shining feet he bound the fair sandals,
and pinned about him a great vermilion mantle sweeping
in a double fold, with a thick fleece of wool upon it.
135 Then he caught up a powerful spear, edged with sharp bronze,
and went on his way down the ships of the bronze-armored Achaians.
First he came on Odysseus, the equal of Zeus in counsel,
and Nestor the Gerenian horseman wakened him from sleep,
speaking aloud, and the wave of the voice swept quick through his
hearing
140 and he came forth from his shelter and called out his word to them:
“Why do you wander thus up and down the ships and the army
alone, through the immortal night? What need is upon you?”
Thereupon the Gerenian horseman Nestor answered him:
“Son of Laërtes and seed of Zeus, resourceful Odysseus,
145 do not be angry; such grief has fallen upon the Achaians.
Come then with us to waken another, for whom it is becoming
to deliberate the question of running away or of fighting.”
He spoke, and resourceful Odysseus moving back into his shelter
put the bright-patterned shield on his shoulders, and went on with them.
150 They went to the son of Tydeus, Diomedes, and found him
with his gear outside the shelter, and his companions about him
slept with their shields underneath their heads, and their spears beside
them
stood upright, the heels driven deep in the ground, and the bronze afar
off
glared, like the lightning of Zeus father. The hero
155 slept, with the hide of a field-ranging ox laid beneath him,
but underneath his head was laid out a lustrous blanket.
Nestor the Gerenian horseman stood by to waken him
and roused him, stirring him with his heel, and scolded him to his face:
“Son of Tydeus, wake up! Why do you doze in slumber
160 nightlong? Do you not hear how the Trojans at the break of the flat
land
are sitting close to our ships, and narrow ground holds them from us?”
So he spoke, and the other rapidly stirred from his sleeping
and spoke winged words to him and addressed him thus: “Aged sir,

you are a hard man. You are never finished with working.
165 Now are there not other sons of the Achaians younger than you are
who could be going about everywhere to each of the princes
and waking them up? But you, aged sir, are too much for us.”
In turn Nestor the Gerenian horseman said to him:
“Yes, dear friend, all this that you said has been fairly spoken.
170 I myself have sons without blame, I have followers,
plenty of them, of whom any could go to summon the princes.
But this difficulty is very great that has come to the Achaians,
since for all of us the decision now stands on the edge of a razor
whether the Achaians shall have life or sorry destruction.
175 But go now to Aias the swift and the son of Phyleus
and waken them—you are younger than I—if truly you have pity.”
He spoke, and the other wrapped his shoulders in the hide of a lion
glowing and huge, that swung to his feet, and took up a spear.
The hero went, and waking the others brought them back with him.

180

Now as these men mingled with the sentries assembling
they found the leaders of the pickets by no means asleep
but all of them were wide awake, and sat by their weapons.
As dogs about the sheep in a yard are restless in watching
as they hear a wild beast boldly moving, who through the timber
185 goes among the mountains, and a clamor rises about him
of men and of dogs, and all their sleep has been broken from them;
so for these the soft ness of sleep was broken from their eyes
as they held the bitter midwatch, since they were turning always
toward the plain, where they heard the Trojans coming and going.
190 The aged man was glad when he saw them, and with speech of good
cheer
spoke winged words to them and addressed them thus: “Continue
to keep your watch this way, beloved children, and let not
sleep seize any, lest you become a delight to your enemies.”

So he spoke, and strode on through the ditch, and there followed with
him
195 the kings of the Argives, all who had been called into conclave,
and with them went Meriones and Nestor’s glorious
son, since the kings themselves called these to take counsel with them.
After they had crossed the deep-dug ditch they settled
on clean ground, where there showed a space not cumbered with
corpses
200 of the fallen, a place whence Hektor the huge had turned back
from destroying the Argives, after the night had darkened about him.
There they seated themselves, and opened words to each other,
and the Gerenian horseman Nestor began speaking among them:
“O my friends, is there no man who, trusting in the daring
205 of his own heart, would go among the high-hearted Trojans?
So he might catch some enemy, who straggled behind them,
or he might overhear some thing that the Trojans are saying,
what they deliberate among themselves, and whether they purpose
to stay where they are, close to the ships, or else to withdraw back
210 into their city, now that they have beaten the Achaians.
Could a man learn this, and then come back again to us
unhurt, why huge and heaven-high would rise up his glory
among all people, and an excellent gift would befall him;
for all those who hold by the ships high power as princes,
215 of all these each one of them will give him a black sheep,
female, with a lamb beneath; there shall be no gift like this one,
one that will be forever by at the feasts and festivals.”
So he spoke, and all of them stayed stricken to silence;
but now Diomedes of the great war cry spoke forth among them:
220 “Nestor, my own heart and my own proud spirit arouse me
to go into the host of the hateful men who lie near us,
the Trojans; but if some other man would go along with me
there would be more comfort in it, and greater confidence.
When two go together, one of them at least looks forward
225 to see what is best; a man by himself, though he be careful,
still has less mind in him than two, and his wits have less weight.”

“He spoke, and many were willing to go with Diomedes.
The two Aiantes were willing, henchman of Ares, and likewise
Meriones, and Nestor’s son altogether willing,
230 and Atreus’ son was willing, Menelaos the spear-famed,
and patient Odysseus too was willing to enter the multitude
of Trojans, since forever the heart in his breast was daring.
Now it was the lord of men, Agamemnon, who spoke to them:
Son of Tydeus, you who delight my heart, Diomedes,
235 pick your man to be your companion, whichever you wish,
the best of all who have shown, since many are eager to do it.
You must not, for the awe that you feel in your heart, pass over
the better man and take the worse, giving way to modesty
and looking to his degree—not even if he be kinglier.”
240 So he spoke, and was frightened for Menelaos of the fair hair.
But now again Diomedes of the great war cry spoke forth:
“If indeed you tell me myself to pick my companion,
how then could I forget Odysseus the godlike, he whose
heart and whose proud spirit are beyond all others forward
245 in all hard endeavors, and Pallas Athene loves him.
Were he to go with me, both of us could come back from the blazing
of fire itself, since his mind is best at devices.”
Then in turn long-suffering brilliant Odysseus answered him:
“Son of Tydeus, do not praise me so, nor yet blame me.
250 These are the Argives, who know well all these matters you speak of.
But let us go: for the night draws far along, and the dawn nears,
the stars have gone far on their course, and the full of the night has
passed by,
through two portions, and the third portion is that which is left us.”
So they spoke, and armed themselves in their weapons of terror,
255 and Thrasymedes the stubborn in battle gave the son of Tydeus
a two-edged sword (his own had been left behind by his vessel)
and a shield; and he put over his head a helmet
of bull’s hide, with neither horn nor crest, which is known as
the skull cap, and guards the heads of strong men in battle;
260 while Meriones gave Odysseus a bow and a quiver

and a sword; and he too put over his head a helmet
fashioned of leather; on the inside the cap was cross-strung firmly
with thongs of leather, and on the outer side the white teeth
of a tusk-shining boar were close sewn one after another
265 with craftsmanship and skill; and a felt was set in the center.
Autolykos, breaking into the close-built house, had stolen it
from Amyntor, the son of Ormenos, out of Eleon,
and gave it to Kytherian Amphidamas, at Skandeia;
Amphidamas gave it in turn to Molos, a gift of guest-friendship,
270 and Molos gave it to his son Meriones to carry.
But at this time it was worn to cover the head of Odysseus.
When these two had armed themselves in their weapons of terror
they went on their way, and left behind there all the princes,
and on the right near the way they were taking Pallas Athene
275 sent down a heron to them; indeed, their eyes could not see it
through the darkness of night, but they could hear it crying.
And Odysseus was glad at the bird-sign, and prayed to Athene:
“Hear me, daughter of Zeus of the aegis, you who forever
stand beside me in all hard tasks, nor am I forgotten
280 as I go my ways: now give me the best of your love, Athene,
and grant that we come back in glory to the strong-benched vessels
when we have done a great thing that will sadden the Trojans.”
Diomedes of the great war cry spoke in prayer after him:
“Hear me also, Atrytone, daughter of great Zeus.
285 Come with me now as you went with my father, brilliant Tydeus,
into Thebes, when he went with a message before the Achaians,
and left the bronze-armored Achaians beside Asopos
while he carried a word of friendship to the Kadmeians
in that place; but on his way back he was minded to grim deeds
290 with your aid, divine goddess, since you stood in goodwill beside him.
So now again be willing to stand by me, and watch over me,
and I in turn will dedicate you a heifer, broad-browed,
one year old, unbroken, that no man ever led under
the yoke. I will drench her horns in gold and offer her to you.”
295 So they spoke in prayer, and Pallas Athene heard them.

Then, after they had made their prayers to the daughter of great Zeus
they went on their way like two lions into the black night
through the carnage and through the corpses, war gear and dark blood.
Nor did Hektor either permit the high-hearted Trojans
300 to sleep, but had called together in a group all of their great men,
those who were the leaders of Troy and their men of deliberation.
Summoning these he compacted before them his close counsel:
“Who would take upon him this work and bring it to fulfillment
for a huge price? The reward will be one that will suffice him;
305 for I will give a chariot and two strong-necked horses
who are the finest of all beside the fast ships of the Achaians
to him who has the daring, winning honor for himself also,
to go close to the swift-running ships and find out for us
whether the swift ships are guarded, as they were before this,
310 or whether now the Achaians who are beaten under our hands
are planning flight among themselves, and no longer are willing
to guard them by night, now that stark weariness has broken them.”
So he spoke, and all of them were stricken to silence.
But there was one among the Trojans, Dolon, Eumedes’
315 son, the sacred herald’s, a man of much gold and much bronze.
He was an evil man to look on, but was swift-footed;
moreover he was a single son among five sisters.
This man now spoke his word before the Trojans and Hektor:
“Hektor, my own heart and my proud spirit arouse me
320 to go close to the swift-running ships and to learn about them.
Come then, hold up your scepter before me, and swear upon it
that you will give me the horses, and the chariot made bright
with bronze, that carry the blameless son of Peleus. I shall not
be a vain spy for you, nor less than your expectation,
325 for I shall go straight on through their army, until I come to
the ship of Agamemnon, where their greatest men must be gathered
to deliberate the question of running away or of fighting.”
He spoke, and Hektor took the staff in his hand, and swore to him:
“Let Zeus, loud-thundering lord of Hera, now be my witness
330 himself, that no other man of the Trojans shall mount these horses,

since I say they shall be utterly yours, and your glory.”
He spoke, and swore to an empty oath, and stirred the man onward.
And at once Dolon cast across his shoulders the bent bow.
He put on about him the pelt of a gray wolf, and on his head set
335 a cap of marten’s hide, and took up a sharp throwing spear
and went on his way toward the ships from his own camp, nor was he
ever
to come back again from the ships, and carry his word to Hektor.
Now when he had left behind the throng of men and of horses
he went on his way, eagerly, but illustrious Odysseus
340 was aware of him coming and spoke to Diomedes:
“This is some man, Diomedes, on his way from the army.
I do not know whether he comes to spy on our vessels
or to strip some one of the perished corpses, but we must let him
first go on past us a little way in the open
345 and afterward we will make a rush and fasten upon him
suddenly. But if in the speed of his feet he eludes us
then keep him crowded upon the ships, and away from the army
always, feinting with the spear, nor let him escape to the city.”
So they spoke, and bent aside from their way, through the corpses,
350 while he in the thoughtlessness of his heart ran swiftly by them.
But when he was gone from them as far as the range of a plough yoke
of mules, since these are better beasts than oxen for dragging
the wrought ploughshare through the depth of the harvest land, these
two
ran after him, and he heard the thudding of their feet and stopped still.
355 He thought in his heart these would be friends from among the Trojans
to turn him back, and that Hektor had sped them to summon him again.
But when they got to a spear’s throw from him, or less even,
he saw that these were enemy men, and moved his knees rapidly
to run away, and these set out in rapid chase of him.
360 And, as when two rip-fanged hounds have sighted a wild beast,
a young deer, or a hare, and go after it, eagerly always
through the spaces of the woods, and the chase runs crying before
them,

so the son of Tydeus, and Odysseus, sacker of cities,
kept always hard on his heels and cut him off from his people.
365 But when he was on the point of reaching the Achaian pickets,
as he fled toward the vessels, then Athene put great power
in Tydeus’ son, so that no other bronze-armored Achaian
might win the glory of striking him down, and he come in second.
Powerful Diomedes threatening with the spear spoke to him:
370 “Either wait, or my spear will catch you. I think that you will not
thus get clear from my hands for long, and sudden destruction.”
He spoke, and let fly with his spear, but missed, on purpose,
his man, as the point of the polished spear went over his right shoulder
and stuck fast in the earth. And Dolon stood still in terror
375 gibbering, as through his mouth came the sound of his teeth’s chatter
in green fear; and these two, breathing hard, came up to him
and caught him by the hands, and he broke into tears and spoke to
them:
“Take me alive, and I will pay my ransom: in my house
there is bronze, and gold, and difficultly wrought iron,
380 and my father would make you glad with abundant ransom
were he to hear that I am alive by the ships of the Achaians.”
Then resourceful Odysseus spoke in turn, and answered him:
“Do not fear, and let no thought of death be upon you.
But come, tell me this thing and recite it to me accurately:
385 where is it that you walk alone to the ships from the army
through the darkness of night when other mortals are sleeping?
Is it to strip some one of the perished corpses, or is it
that Hektor sent you out to spy with care upon each thing
beside our hollow ships? Or did your own spirit drive you?”
390 Then Dolon answered him, but his legs were shaking beneath him:
“Hektor has led my mind astray with many deceptions.
He promised me the single-foot horses of proud Achilleus,
Peleus’ son, and the chariot bright with bronze, for my gift,
and gave me an order, to go through the running black night,
395 and get close to the enemy men, and find out for him
whether the swift ships are guarded, as they were before this,

or whether now the Achaians who are broken under our hands
are planning flight among themselves, and no longer are willing
to guard them by night, now that stark weariness has broken them.”
400 Then Odysseus the resourceful smiled and spoke to him:
“Surely now, these were mighty gifts that your heart longed after,
the horses of valiant Aiakides. They are difficult horses
for mortal men to manage, or even to ride behind them
for all except Achilleus, who was born of an immortal mother.
405 But come, tell me this thing and recite it to me accurately.
Where did you leave Hektor, the people’s shepherd, when you came
here?
Where is his gear of war lying? Where are his horses?
How are the rest of the Trojans disposed, the guards and the sleepers?
What do they deliberate among themselves? Do they purpose
410 to stay where they are, close to the ships? Or else to withdraw back
into the city, now that they have beaten the Achaians?”
Then in turn Dolon the son of Eumedes spoke to him:
“See, I will accurately recite all these things to you.
Hektor is now among those who are the men of counsel
415 and they hold their deliberations by the barrow of godlike Ilos
apart from the confusion. But those guards that you ask of, hero—there
is no detail that protects the army and guards it.
As for the watchfire hearths of the Trojans, those who must do it
keep awake by the fires and pass on the picket duty
420 to each other, but their far-assembled companions in battle
are sleeping, and pass on to the Trojans the duty of watching,
since their own children do not lie nearby, nor their women.”
Then resourceful Odysseus spoke in turn, and answered him:
“How, then, are these sleeping? And are they mixed with the Trojans,
425 breakers of horses, or apart? Tell me, so I may be clear.”
Then in turn Dolon the son of Eumedes answered him:
“See, I will accurately recite all these things to you.
Next the sea are the Karians, and Paionians with their curved bows,
the Leleges and Kaukonians and the brilliant Pelasgians.
430 By Thymbre are stationed the Lykians and the proud Mysians

with the Phrygians who fight from horses, and Maionians, lords of
chariots.
But why do you question me on all this, each thing in detail?
For if you are minded to get among the mass of the Trojans,
here are the Thracians, new come, separate, beyond all others
435 in place, and among them Rhesos their king, the son of Eïoneus.
And his are the finest horses I ever saw, and the biggest;
they are whiter than snow, and their speed of foot is the winds’ speed;
his chariot is fairly ornate with gold and with silver,
and the armor is golden and gigantic, a wonder to look on,
440 that he brought here with him. It is not like armor for mortal
men to carry, but for the immortal gods. And therefore
take me with you to some place by the fast-running vessels,
or else tie me fast here in a pitiless bond, and leave me,
until you can make your venture, and try out the truth of my story,
445 whether I have told you this fairly, or whether I have not.”
But powerful Diomedes looked darkly at him and spoke then:
“Do not, Dolon, have in your mind any thought of escape
now you have got in our hands, though you brought us an excellent
message.
For if we let you get away now, or set you free, later
450 you will come back again to the fast ships of the Achaians
either to spy on us once more, or to fight strongly with us.
But if, beaten down under my hands, you lose your life now,
then you will nevermore be an affliction upon the Argives.”
He spoke, and the man was trying to reach his chin with his strong
hand
455 and cling, and supplicate him, but he struck the middle of his neck
with a sweep of the sword, and slashed clean through both tendons,
and Dolon’s head still speaking dropped in the dust. They took off
his cap of marten’s hide from his head, and stripped off also
the wolf’s pelt, and the back-strung bow, and the long spear.
460 Brilliant Odysseus held these up to Athene the Spoiler
high in his hand, and spoke a word, and prayed to Athene:
“Hail, goddess. These are yours. To you first of all the immortals

on Olympos we will give your due share. Only guide us
once again to where the Thracians sleep, and their horses.”

465

So he spoke, and lifting the spoils high from him he placed them
upon a tamarisk bush, and piled a clear landmark beside them,
pulling reeds together and the long branches of tamarisk
that they might not miss them on their way back through the running
black night.
These two went ahead on their way through war gear and dark blood
470 and came suddenly to the Thracians for whom they were looking.
These were asleep, worn out with weariness, and their armor
lay in splendor and good order on the ground beside them
in three rows, and beside each man stood his team of horses.
Rhesos slept in the center with his fast horses about him
475 tethered by the reins to the outer rail of the chariot. Odysseus
was the first to see him and pointed him out to Diomedes:
“Here is our man, see, Diomedes, and here are his horses,
those that Dolon, the man we killed, pointed out to us.
Come then, put forward your great strength. Here is no matter
480 for standing by idle in your weapons. Untie the horses;
or else let me look after them, while you kill the people.”
He spoke, and gray-eyed Athene breathed strength into Diomedes
and he began to kill them one after another. Grim sounds rose
from there as they were stricken with the sword, and the ground
reddened with blood.
485 As a lion advancing on the helpless herds unshepherded
of sheep or goats pounces upon them with wicked intention,
so the son of Tydeus attacked the Thracian people
until he had killed twelve. Meanwhile resourceful Odysseus
as Tydeus’ son stood over each man with the sword, and struck him,
490 would catch each dead man by the foot from behind, and drag him
away, with this thought in his mind, that the bright-maned horses
might pass easily through and not be shaken within them
at stepping on dead men. These horses were not yet used to them.

But when the son of Tydeus came to the king, and this was
495 the thirteenth man, he stripped the sweetness of life from him
as he lay heavily breathing—since a bad dream stood by his head
in the night—no dream, but Oineus’ son, by device of Athene.
Meanwhile patient Odysseus was untying the single-foot horses,
and pulled them together with the reins, and drove them from the
confusion
500 and whipped them with his bow, since he had not noticed nor taken
in his hands the glittering whip that was in the elaborate chariot.
He whistled to brilliant Diomedes as a signal to him.
But he waited, divided in his mind as to what he would best do,
whether to seize the chariot, wherein lay the bright armor,
505 and draw it away by the pole, or lift it and carry it off with him,
or strip the life from still more of the Thracians. Meanwhile
as he was pondering all this in his heart, Athene
came and stood beside him, and spoke to great Diomedes:
“Think now, son of great-hearted Tydeus, of getting back
510 to the hollow ships; else you might go back with men pursuing
if there should be some other god to waken the Trojans.”
So she spoke, and he knew the voice of the goddess speaking
and lightly mounted behind the horses. Odysseus whipped them
with his bow, and they ran for the rapid ships of the Achaians.
515 Neither did Apollo of the silver bow keep blind watch,
since he saw Athene attending the son of Tydeus. Angered
with her he plunged into the great multitude of the Trojans
and roused a man of counsel among the Thracians, Hippokoön
the lordly cousin of Rhesos; and he, starting out of his sleep,
520 when he saw the place left empty where the fast horses had been
standing
and his men in the shambles of slaughter gasping their lives out,
he groaned, and called aloud by name his beloved companion.
And a clamor rose up from the Trojans and a vast turmoil
as they swept together in confusion and stared at the ghastly work done
525 by these two men, before they went back to their hollow vessels.

But when these had come back to the place where they killed
Hektor’s scout,
Odysseus beloved of Zeus reined in his running horses
while Tydeus’ son leaping to the ground took the bloody war spoils
and handed them to Odysseus, and got up behind the horses.
530 Odysseus lashed them on, and they winged their way unreluctant
back to the hollow ships, since this was the way he desired it.
Nestor was the first to hear their thunder, and spoke forth:
“Friends, who are leaders of the Argives and keep their counsel,
shall I be wrong, or am I speaking the truth? My heart tells me.
535 The thunder is beating against my ears of fast-running horses.
Might this only be Odysseus and strong Diomedes
driving rapidly away from the Trojans their single-foot horses!
Yet terribly I fear in my heart that these bravest Achaians
might have suffered some disaster from the loud host of the Trojans.”
540 Yet he had not spoken all his words, and they came. The two men
dismounted to the ground, and their companions rejoicing
congratulated them with clasped hands and with words of welcome.
First to question them was the Gerenian horseman, Nestor:
“Come, tell me, honored Odysseus, great glory of the Achaians,
545 how did you win these horses? Did you go into the great company
of the Trojans, or did some god meet you and give them to you?
They shine, like the rays of the sun, terribly. Yet over and over
I encounter the Trojans, I say that I am not at all one
to hang back beside the ships, though I am an aged fighter.
550 Yet I have never seen horses like these, nor laid eyes upon them.
I think it must be some god who met you, and gave them to you.
Since both of you are beloved to Zeus who gathers the clouds, both
to the gray-eyed maiden of Zeus who wears the aegis, Athene.”
Then resourceful Odysseus spoke in turn and answered him:
555 “Son of Neleus, Nestor, great glory of the Achaians:
lightly a god, if he wished, could give us horses even better
than these, seeing that the gods are far stronger than we are.
These horses, aged sir, that you ask about are newcomers
from Thrace, and as for their master brave Diomedes killed him
560 and at his side killed twelve companions, all of them great men;

our thirteenth man killed was their scout, here by the vessels,
one whom Hektor and the rest of the haughty Trojans
had sent out between the lines to spy on our army.”
He spoke, and guided across the ditch the single-foot horses
565 laughing aloud, and the rest of the Achaians went with him
rejoicing. When they came to Diomedes’ strong-fashioned shelter
there they tied up the horses by the carefully cut reins
by the horse trough where already the horses of Diomedes
were standing, rapid of foot, and eating their welcome provender.
570 And by the stern of the ship Odysseus laid down the bloody
battle spoils of Dolon, to dedicate to Athene.
And the men themselves waded into the sea and washed off
the dense sweat from shin and shoulder and thigh. Afterward
when the surf of the sea had rinsed the dense-running sweat away
575 from all their skin, and the inward heart had been cooled to
refreshment,
they stepped into the bathtubs smooth-polished, and bathed there,
and after they had bathed and anointed themselves with olive oil
they sat down to dine, and from the full mixing bowl drawing
the sweet-hearted wine poured out an offering to Athene.

BOOK ELEVEN

Now Dawn rose from her bed, where she lay by haughty Tithonos,
to carry her light to men and to immortals. Zeus sent down
in speed to the fast ships of the Achaians the wearisome goddess
of Hate, holding in her hands the portent of battle.
5 She took her place on the huge-hollowed black ship of Odysseus
which lay in the middle, so that she could cry out to both flanks,
either as far as the shelters of Telamonian Aias
or to those of Achilleus; since these had hauled their balanced ships up
at the ends, certain of their manhood and their hands’ strength.
10 There the goddess took her place, and cried out a great cry
and terrible and loud, and put strength in all the Achaians’
hearts, to go on tirelessly with their fighting of battles.
And now battle became sweeter to them than to go back
in their hollow ships to the beloved land of their fathers.

15

And Atreus’ son cried out aloud and drove the Achaians
to gird them, while he himself put the shining bronze upon him.
First he placed along his legs the beautiful greaves linked
with silver fastenings to hold the greaves at the ankles.
Afterward he girt on about his chest the corselet
20 that Kinyras had given him once, to be a guest present
For the great fame and rumor of war had carried to Kypros
how the Achaians were to sail against Troy in their vessels.
Therefore he gave the king as a gift of grace this corselet.
Now there were ten circles of deep cobalt upon it,
25 and twelve of gold and twenty of tin. And toward the opening

at the throat there were rearing up three serpents of cobalt
on either side, like rainbows, which the son of Kronos
has marked upon the clouds, to be a portent to mortals.
Across his shoulders he slung the sword, and the nails upon it
30 were golden and glittered, and closing about it the scabbard
was silver, and gold was upon the swordstraps that held it.
And he took up the man-enclosing elaborate stark shield,
a thing of splendor. There were ten circles of bronze upon it,
and set about it were twenty knobs of tin, pale-shining,
35 and in the very center another knob of dark cobalt.
And circled in the midst of all was the blank-eyed face of the Gorgon
with her stare of horror, and Fear was inscribed upon it, and Terror.
The strap of the shield had silver upon it, and there also on it
was coiled a cobalt snake, and there were three heads upon him
40 twisted to look backward and grown from a single neck, all three.
Upon his head he set the helmet, two-horned, four-sheeted,
with the horse-hair crest, and the plumes nodded terribly above it.
Then he caught up two strong spears edged with sharp bronze
and the brazen heads flashed far from him deep into heaven.
45 And Hera and Athene caused a crash of thunder about him,
doing honor to the lord of deep-golden Mykenai.
Thereupon each man gave orders to his charioteer
to rein in the horses once again by the ditch, in good order,
while they themselves, dismounted and armed in their war gear, swept
onward
50 to the ditch, and their incessant clamor rose up in the morning.
In battle array they came to the ditch well ahead of the horseman
and the horseman followed a little behind. And the son of Kronos
drove down the evil turmoil upon them, and from aloft cast
down dews dripping blood from the sky, since he was minded
55 to hurl down a multitude of strong heads to the house of Hades.
On the other side of the ditch at the break of the plain the Trojans
gathered about tall Hektor and stately Poulydamas
and Aineias, honored by Trojans in their countryside as a god is,
and the three sons of Antenor, Polybos, and brilliant Agenor,

60 and Akamas, a young man still, in the likeness of the immortals.
And Hektor carried the perfect circle of his shield in the foremost,
as among the darkened clouds the bale star shows forth
in all shining, then merges again in the clouds and the darkness.
So Hektor would at one time be shining among the foremost,
65 and then once more urging on the last, and complete in bronze armor
glittered like the thunder-flash of Zeus of the aegis, our father.
And the men, like two lines of reapers who, facing each other,
drive their course all down the field of wheat or of barley
for a man blessed in substance, and the cut swathes drop showering,
70 so Trojans and Achaians driving in against one another
cut men down, nor did either side think of disastrous panic.
The pressure held their heads on a line, and they whirled and fought
like
wolves, and Hate, the Lady of Sorrow, was gladdened to watch them.
She alone of all the immortals attended this action
75 but the other immortals were not there, but sat quietly
remote and apart in their palaces, where for each one of them
a house had been built in splendor along the folds of Olympos.
All were blaming the son of Kronos, Zeus of the dark mists,
because his will was to give glory to the Trojans. To these gods
80 the father gave no attention at all, but withdrawn from them
and rejoicing in the pride of his strength sat apart from the others
looking out over the city of Troy and the ships of the Achaians,
watching the flash of the bronze, and men killing and men killed.

So long as it was early morning and the sacred daylight increasing,
85 so long the thrown weapons of both took hold and men dropped under
them.
But at that time when the woodcutter makes ready his supper
in the wooded glens of the mountains, when his arms and hands have
grown weary
from cutting down the tall trees, and his heart has had enough of it,

and longing for food and for sweet wine takes hold of his senses;
90 at that time the Danaäns by their manhood broke the battalions
calling across the ranks to each other. First Agamemnon
drove on, and killed a man, Bienor, shepherd of the people,
himself, then his companion Oïleus, lasher of horses;
who, springing down from behind his horses, stood forth to face him,
95 but Agamemnon stabbed straight at his face as he came on in fury
with the sharp spear, nor did helm’s bronze-heavy edge hold it,
but the spearhead passed through this and the bone, and the inward
brain was all spattered forth. So he beat him down in his fury,
and Agamemnon the lord of men left them lying there
100 and their white bodies showing, since he had stripped off their tunics.
Then he went on to kill and strip Isos and Antiphos,
two sons of Priam, bastard one and one lawful, both riding
in a single chariot. The bastard, Isos, was charioteer
and renowned Antiphos rode beside him. Before this Achilleus
105 had caught these two at the knees of Ida, and bound them in pliant
willows as they watched by their sheep, and released them for ransom.
This time the son of Atreus, wide-powerful Agamemnon,
struck Isos with the thrown spear in the chest above the nipple
and hit Antiphos by the ear with the sword and hurled him from his
horses,
110 and in eager haste he stripped off from these their glorious armor
which he knew; he had seen these two before by the fast ships
when Achilleus of the swift feet had brought them in from Ida.
And as a lion seizes the innocent young of the running
deer, and easily crunches and breaks them caught in the strong teeth
115 when he has invaded their lair, and rips out the soft heart from them,
and even if the doe be very near, still she has no strength
to help, for the ghastly shivers of fear are upon her also
and suddenly she dashes away through the glades and the timber
sweating in her speed away from the pounce of the strong beast;
120 so there was no one of the Trojans who could save these two
from death, but they themselves were running in fear from the Argives.
Next he caught Peisandros and Hippolochos stubborn in battle,

sons of Antimachos the wise, who beyond all others
had taken the gold of Alexandros, glorious gifts, so that
125 he had opposed the return of Helen to fair-haired Menelaos.
Powerful Agamemnon caught his two sons riding
in one chariot, who together guided the running horses.
Now the glittering reins escaped from the hands of both of them
and they were stunned with fear, for against them rose like a lion
130 Atreus’ son, and they supplicated him out of the chariot:
“Take us alive, son of Atreus, and take appropriate ransom.
In the house of Antimachos the treasures lie piled in abundance,
bronze is there, and gold, and difficultly wrought iron,
and our father would make you glad with abundant repayment
135 were he to hear we were alive by the ships of the Achaians.”
Thus these two cried out upon the king, lamenting
and in pitiful phrase, but they heard the voice that was without pity:
“If in truth you are the sons of wise Antimachos,
that man who once among the Trojans assembled advised them
140 that Menelaos, who came as envoy with godlike Odysseus,
should be murdered on the spot nor let go back to the Achaians,
so now your mutilation shall punish the shame of your father.”
He spoke, and spurned Peisandros to the ground from the chariot
with a spear-stroke in the chest, and he crashed on his back to the
ground. Then
145 Hippolochos sprang away, but Atreides killed him dismounted,
cutting away his arms with a sword-stroke, free of the shoulder,
and sent him spinning like a log down the battle. Thereafter
he left them, and toward that place where the most battalions were
shaken
drove, and beside him drove the rest of the strong-greaved Achaians,
150 and footmen killed footmen who fled under strong compulsion
and riders killed riders, and a storm of dust rose up under them
out of the plain uplifted by the thundering feet of their horses.
They killed with the bronze, and among them powerful Agamemnon
went onward always slaying and urged on the rest of the Argives.
155 As when obliterating fire comes down on the timbered forest
and the roll of the wind carries it everywhere, and bushes

leaning under the force of the fire’s rush tumble uprooted,
so before Atreus’ son Agamemnon went down the high heads
of the running Trojans, and in many places the strong-necked horses
160 rattled their empty chariots along the causeways of battle,
and longed for their haughty charioteers, who were lying
along the ground, to delight no longer their wives, but the vultures.
But Zeus drew Hektor out from under the dust and the missiles,
out of the place where men were killed, the blood and confusion,
165 while Atreides followed urging the Danaäns forever onward.
The Trojans swept in their flight past the barrow of ancient Ilos
Dardanos’ son, to the center of the level ground and the fig tree,
as they made for the city, and he followed them always, screaming,
Atreus’ son, his invincible hands spattered with bloody filth.
170 But when they had made their way to the Skaian gates and the oak tree
the Trojans stood their ground, and each side endured the other,
the Trojans stood their ground, and each side endured the other,
while others still in the middle plain stampeded like cattle
when a lion, coming upon them in the dim night, has terrified
the whole herd, while for a single one sheer death is emerging.
175 First the lion breaks her neck caught fast in the strong teeth,
then gulps down the blood and all the guts that are inward;
so Atreus’ son, powerful Agamemnon, went after them
killing ever the last of the men; and they fled in terror.
Many were hurled from behind their horses, face downward or
sprawling
180 under the hands of Atreides who raged with his spear in the forefront.
But when he was on the point of making his way to the city
and the steep wall, the father of gods and of men descending
out of the sky took his place along the ridges of Ida
of the fountains, and held fast in his hands the thunderbolt.
185 He sent on her way Iris of the golden wings with a message:
“Go on your way, swift Iris, and carry my word to Hektor:
as long as he beholds Agamemnon, shepherd of the people,
raging among the champions and cutting down the ranged fighters,
so long let him hold back and urge on the rest of his people

190 to fight against the enemy through this strong encounter.
But when, either struck with a spear or hit by a flying arrow,
he springs up behind his horses, then I guarantee power to Hektor
to kill men, till he makes his way to the strong-benched vessels,
until the sun goes down and the blessed darkness comes over.”

195

He spoke, and swift wind-footed Iris did not disobey him,
but went down along the hills of Ida to sacred Ilion,
and found the son of wise Priam, Hektor the brilliant,
standing among the compacted chariots and by the horses.
Iris the swift of foot came close beside and spoke to him:
200 “Hektor, O son of Priam and equal of Zeus in counsel,
Zeus my father has sent me down to tell you this message.
As long as you behold Agamemnon, shepherd of the people,
raging among the champions and cutting down the ranged fighters,
so long hold back from the fighting,
but urge on the rest of your people
205 to fight against the enemy through this strong encounter.
But when, either struck with a spear or hit by a flying arrow,
he springs up behind his horses, then Zeus guarantees power to you
to kill men, till you make your way to the strong-benched vessels,
until the sun goes down and the blessed darkness comes over.”
210 Swift-foot Iris spoke to him thus and went away from him,
and Hektor in all his armor leapt to the ground from his chariot
and shaking two sharp spears in his hand ranged over the whole host
stirring them up to fight and waking the ghastly warfare.
So they whirled about and stood their ground against the Achaians,
215 and the Argives against them pulled together their battle lines.
So the fighting grew close and they faced each other, and foremost
Agamemnon drove on, trying to fight far ahead of all others.

Tell me now, you Muses who have your homes on Olympos,

who was the first to come forth and stand against Agamemnon
220 of the very Trojans, or their renowned companions in battle.
Iphidamas, Antenor’s son, the huge and stalwart
who had been reared in generous Thrace, the mother of sheepflocks.
Kisseus had raised him in his own house when he was little,
his mother’s father, whose child was Theano, the girl of the fair cheeks.
225 But when he had arrived at the stature of powerful manhood
Kisseus detained him there and gave him his daughter. Married
he went away from the bride chamber, looking for glory
from the Achaians, with twelve curved ships that followed with him.
These balanced vessels he had left behind in Perkote
230 and gone himself to fight on foot at Ilion; and there
he came face to face with Atreus’ son, Agamemnon.
Now when these in their advance were close to each other
the son of Atreus missed with his throw, and the spear was turned past
him,
but Iphidamas stabbed to the belt underneath the corselet
235 and leaned in on the stroke in the confidence of his strong hand
but could not get clean through the bright war belt, far sooner
the spearpoint pushed against the silver bent back, like softlead.
And in his hand wide-powerful Agamemnon catching it
dragged it against him, raging like a lion, and tore it
240 out of his hand, then struck the neck with his sword, and unstrung him.
So Iphidamas fell there and went into the brazen slumber,
unhappy, who came to help his own people, and left his young wife
a bride, and had known no delight from her yet, and given much for
her.
First he had given a hundred oxen, then promised a thousand
245 head of goats and sheep, which were herded for him in abundance.
Now Agamemnon, son of Atreus, stripped him and went back
to the throng of the Achaians bearing the splendid armor.
When Koön, conspicuous among the fighters, perceived him,
he who was Antenor’s eldest born, the strong sorrow
250 misted about his eyes for the sake of his fallen brother.
He came from the side and unobserved at great Agamemnon

and stabbed with his spear at the middle arm, underneath the elbow,
and the head of the glittering spear cut its way clean through.
Agamemnon the lord of men shuddered with fear then
255 but even so did not give up the attack or his fighting
but sprang at Koön, gripping a spear that struck with the wind’s speed.
Now Koön was dragging his father’s son, his brother Iphidamas,
by the foot back eagerly, and cried out on all the bravest,
but as he dragged him into the crowd, Agamemnon thrust at him
260 with the smoothed bronze spear underneath the knobbed shield, and
unstrung him,
then came up and hewed off his head over Iphidamas.
There under the king, Atreus’ son, the sons of Antenor
filled out their destiny and went down to the house of the death god.
But Agamemnon ranged the ranks of the other fighters
265 with spear and sword and with huge stones that he flung, for such time
as the blood was still running warm from the spear-wound.
But after the sore place was dry, and the flow of blood stopped,
the sharp pains began to break in on the strength of Atreides.
As the sharp sorrow of pain descends on a woman in labor,
270 the bitterness that the hard spirits of childbirth bring on,
Hera’s daughters, who hold the power of the bitter birthpangs,
so the sharp pains began to break in on the strength of Atreides.
He sprang back into the car, and called to his charioteer
to drive him back to the hollow ships, since his heart was heavy.
275 He lifted his voice and called in a piercing cry to the Danaäns:
“Friends, O leaders and men of counsel among the Argives,
you must still continue to defend our seafaring vessels
from the wearying attack, since Zeus of the counsels would not
allow me to do battle daylong against the Trojans.”
280 He spoke, and the charioteer lashed on the bright-maned horses
back toward the hollow ships, and they winged their way unreluctant.
The foam ran down their chests, they were powdered with dust from
beneath them
as they carried the stricken king away from the fighting.

When Hektor was aware of Agamemnon withdrawing
285 he called out in a great voice to Trojans and Lykians:
“Trojans, Lykians and Dardanians who fight at close quarters,
be men now, dear friends, remember your furious valor.
Their best man is gone, and Zeus, Kronos’ son, has consented
to my great glory; but steer your single-foot horses straight on
290 at the powerful Danaäns, so win you the higher glory.”
So he spoke, and stirred the spirit and strength in each man.
As when some huntsman drives to action his hounds with shining
teeth against some savage beast, wild boar or lion,
so against the Achaians Hektor the son of Priam,
295 a man like the murderous war god, lashed on the high-hearted Trojans.
And he himself with high thoughts strode out in the foremost
and hurled himself on the struggle of men like a high-blown stormcloud
which swoops down from above to trouble the blue sea-water.
Who then was the first, and who the last that he slaughtered,
300 Hektor, Priam’s son, now that Zeus granted him glory?
Asaios first, and then Autonoös and Opites,
and Dolops, Klytios’ son, Opheltios and Agelaos,
and Aisymnos, and Oros, and Hipponoös stubborn in battle.
He killed these, who were lords of the Danaäns, and thereafter
305 the multitude, as when the west wind strikes in the deepening
whirlstorm to batter the clouds of the shining south wind,
so that the bulging big waves roll hard and the blown spume
scatters high before the force of the veering wind’s blast.
So the massed high heads of the people were struck down by Hektor.
310 And now there might have been havoc and hopeless things done, now
the running Achaians might have tumbled back into their own ships
had not Odysseus cried out to Tydeus’ son, Diomedes:
“Son of Tydeus, what has happened to us that we have forgotten
our fighting strength? Come here and stand with me, brother. There
must be
315 shame on us, if Hektor of the glancing helm captures our vessels.”
Then in answer powerful Diomedes spoke to him:

“Yes, I will stand with you and take what I must, yet
we shall not have our way for long, since Zeus the cloud-gatherer
would wish to give the power to the Trojans rather than to us.”
320 He spoke, and hurled down Thymbraios to the ground from his
horses
with a stroke of the spear by the left nipple. Meanwhile Odysseus
killed this lord of battle’s henchman, godlike Molion.
They left these to lie there, since they had ended their fighting,
then went into the ranks and wrought havoc, as when two wild boars
325 hurl themselves in their pride upon the hounds who pursue them.
So they whirled on the Trojans again and destroyed them. Meanwhile
the Achaians gladly drew breath again after their flight from great
Hektor.
There they took a chariot and two men, lords in their countryside,
sons both of Merops of Perkote, who beyond all men
330 knew the art of prophecy, and tried to prevent his two sons
from going into the battle where men die. Yet these would not
listen, for the spirits of dark death were driving them onward.
Tydeus’ son, Diomedes of the renowned spear, stripped them
of life and spirit, and took away their glorious armor
335 while Odysseus killed Hypeirochos and Hippodamos.
There the son of Kronos strained the battle even between them
as he looked down from Ida. They went on killing each other.
Now Tydeus’ son stabbed with the spear Agastrophos, a chief
and son of Paion, striking at the hip joint. His horses
340 were not by for his escape, but he, strongly infatuate,
had a henchman holding them aside, while he, dismounted,
raged on among the champions until so he lost his dear life.
Hektor saw it sharply across the ranks and rose up against them
with a great cry, and behind him came on the Trojan battalions.
345 Diomedes of the great war cry shivered as he saw him
and suddenly he spoke to Odysseus as he came near:
“Here is this curse, Hektor the huge, wheeling down upon us.
Let us stand, and hold our ground against him, and beat him off from
us.”

So he spoke, and balanced the spear far-shadowed, and threw it
350 aiming at the head, and struck against his mark, nor missed it,
at the high peak of the helm, but the bronze from the bronze was driven
back, nor reached his shining skin, the helmet guarded it,
three-ply and hollow-eyed, which Phoibos Apollo gave him.
But Hektor sprang far away back and merged among his own people,
355 and dropping to one knee stayed leaning on the ground with his heavy
hand, and a covering of black night came over both eyes.
But while the son of Tydeus was following his spear’s cast
far through the front fighters where it fixed in the earth, meanwhile
Hektor got his wind again, and springing back into his chariot
360 drove back into the multitude and avoided the dark death.
Then shaking his spear powerful Diomedes called to him:
“Once again now you escaped death, dog. And yet the evil
came near you, but now once more Phoibos Apollo has saved you,
he to whom you must pray when you go into the thunder of spears
thrown.
365 Yet I may win you, if I encounter you ever hereafter,
if beside me also there is some god who will help me.
Now I must chase whoever I can overtake of the others.”
He spoke, and set about stripping the spear-famed son of Paion.
But now Alexandros, the lord of lovely-haired Helen,
370 pulled his bow against Tydeus’ son, the shepherd of the people,
leaning against the column, work of men’s hand, on the gravemound
of Ilos, Dardanos’ son, an elder of the folk in the old days.
Now Diomedes was stripping the corselet of strong Agastrophos
from about his chest, and the shining shield from his shoulders
375 and the heavy helm, as the other pulled his bow at the handgrip
and shot, and the arrow escaping his hand flew not vain
but struck the flat of the right foot, and the shaft driven clean through
stuck in the ground. Then Alexandros, laughing merrily,
sprang from his hiding-place and cried out his speech of triumph:
380 “You are hit, and my arrow flew not in vain. How I wish
I had struck you in the depth of the belly and torn the life from you.
So the Trojans, who shudder before you as bleating goats do

before a lion, would have got their wind again after disaster.”
Then not at all frightened strong Diomedes answered him:
385 “You archer, foul fighter, lovely in your locks, eyer of young girls.
If you were to make trial of me in strong combat with weapons
your bow would do you no good at all, nor your close-showered
arrows.
Now you have scratched the flat of my foot, and even boast of this.
I care no more than if a witless child or a woman
390 had struck me; this is the blank weapon of a useless man, no fighter.
But if one is struck by me only a little, that is far different,
the stroke is a sharp thing and suddenly lays him lifeless,
and that man’s wife goes with cheeks torn in lamentation,
and his children are fatherless, while he staining the soil with his red
blood
395 rots away, and there are more birds than women swarming about him.”
He spoke, and Odysseus the spear-famed coming up from nearby
stood in front; so he sat down behind him and pulled out
the sharp arrow from his foot, and the hard pain came over his flesh.
He sprang back into the car and called to his charioteer
400 to drive him back to the hollow ships, since his heart was heavy.
Now Odysseus the spear-famed was left alone, nor did any
of the Argives stay beside him, since fear had taken all of them.
And troubled, he spoke then to his own great-hearted spirit:
“Ah me, what will become of me? It will be a great evil
405 if I run, fearing their multitude, yet deadlier if I am caught
alone; and Kronos’ son drove to flight the rest of the Danaäns.
Yet still, why does the heart within me debate on these things
Since I know that it is the cowards who walk out of the fighting,
but if one is to win honor in battle, he must by all means
410 stand his ground strongly, whether he be struck or strike down
another.”
While he was pondering these things in his heart and his spirit
the ranks of the armored Trojans came on against him, and penned him
in their midst, but made thereby a wound in their ranks, as when

closing about a wild boar the hounds and the lusty young men
415 rush him, and he comes out of his lair in the deep of a thicket
grinding to an edge the white fangs in the crook of the jawbones,
and these sweep in all about him, and the vaunt of his teeth uprises
as they await him, terrible though he is, without wavering;
so closing on Odysseus beloved of Zeus the Trojans
420 rushed him. First he stabbed lordly Deïopites
in the shoulder, lunging from above with a stroke of the sharp spear,
and after him he killed Thoön and Ennomos, and next
stabbed Chersidamas as he sprang down from behind his horses
in the navel with a spear’s stroke underneath the massive
425 shield, and he dropping in the dust clawed the ground with his hand.
These
he leftlying, and stabbed with the spear the son of Hippasos,
Charops, full brother of Sokos, a man rich in substance. And Sokos
moved in, a man like a god, to stand over his fallen brother
and came and stood close by Odysseus and spoke a word to him:
430 “Honored Odysseus, insatiable of guile and endeavor,
today you will have two sons of Hippasos to vaunt over
for having killed two such men as we and stripping our armor,
or else, stricken underneath my spear, you might lose your own life.”
He spoke, and stabbed Odysseus’ shield in its perfect circle.
435 All the way through the glittering shield went the heavy spearhead
and crashed its way through the intricately wrought corselet,
and all the skin was torn away from his ribs, yet Pallas
Athene would not let the point penetrate the man’s vitals.
Odysseus saw that the fatal end had not yet come to him,
440 and drew back and spoke a word to Sokos: “Ah, wretch,
surely now steep destruction is advancing upon you.
It is true, you have stopped my fighting against the Trojans,
but I declare that here and now dark death and slaughter
will come upon you this day, and that beaten down under my spear
445 you will give glory to me and your life to Hades of the horses.”
He spoke, and Sokos turning from him was striding in flight
but in his back even as he was turning the spear fixed

between the shoulders and was driven on through the chest beyond it.
He fell, thunderously, and great Odysseus boasted over him:
450 “Sokos, son of wise Hippasos the breaker of horses,
death was too quick for you and ran you down; you could not
avoid it. Wretch, since now your father and your honored mother
will not be able to close your eyes in death, but the tearing
birds will get you, with their wings close-beating about you.
455 If I die, the brilliant Achaians will bury me in honor.”
So he spoke, and dragged the heavy spear of wise Sokos
out of his flesh and out of the shield massive in the middle,
and as it was torn out the blood sprang and his heart was sickened.
But the great-hearted Trojans, when they saw the blood of Odysseus,
460 cried aloud through the close battle and all made a charge against him.
He gave back a little way and called out for his companions.
Three times he called, as much voice as a man’s head could hold,
and three times Menelaos the warlike heard him shouting
and immediately spoke to Aias, who was nearby him:
465 “Son of Telamon, seed of Zeus, Aias, lord of the people,
the war cry of patient Odysseus is ringing about me
with a sound as if he had been cut off by himself, and the Trojans
were handling him violently in the strong encounter. Therefore
let us go to him through the battle. It is better to defend him against
them.
470 I fear that, caught alone, he may be hurt by the Trojans
brave as he is, and so a great loss may befall the Danaäns.”
He spoke, and led the way, and the other followed, a mortal
like a god. They found Odysseus beloved of Zeus, and around him
the Trojans crowded, as bloody scavengers in the mountains
475 crowd on a horned stag who is stricken, one whom a hunter
shot with an arrow from the string, and the stag has escaped him,
running
with his feet, while the blood stayed warm, and his knees were
springing beneath him.
But when the pain of the flying arrow has beaten him, then
the rending scavengers begin to feast on him in the mountains

480 and the shaded glen. But some spirit leads that way a dangerous
lion, and the scavengers run in terror, and the lion eats it;
so about wise much-devising Odysseus the Trojans
crowded now, valiant and numerous, but the hero
with rapid play of his spear beat off the pitiless death-day.
485 Now Aias came near him, carrying like a wall his shield,
and stood forth beside him, and the Trojans fled one way and another.
Then taking Odysseus by the hand warlike Menelaos
led him from the battle, while his henchman drove the horses close up.
But Aias leaping upon the Trojans struck down Doryklos,
490 Priam’s son, but a bastard, and thereafter stabbed Pandokos,
and so also Lysandros and Pyrasos and Pylartes.
As when a swollen river hurls its water, big with rain,
down the mountains to the flat land following rain from the sky god,
and sweeps down with it numbers of dry oaks and of pine trees
495 numbers, until it hurls its huge drift wood into the salt sea;
so now glittering Aias cumbered the plain as he chased them,
slaughtering men and horses alike, nor yet had Hektor
heard, since he was fighting at the left of the entire battle
by the banks of Skamandros river, where more than elsewhere
500 the high heads of men were dropping, and the tireless clamor
rising about tall Nestor and Idomeneus the warlike.
Now Hektor was encountering these and doing grim work
with spear and horsemanship, ruining the battalions of young men.
Yet even so the Achaians would not have given from his path
505 had not Alexandros, the lord of lovely-haired Helen,
stayed from his bravery the shepherd of the people, Machaon,
hitting him with a three-barbed arrow in the right shoulder.
And the Achaians whose wind was fury were frightened for him,
that the enemy might catch him in the backturn of the fighting.
510 At once Idomeneus called out to brilliant Nestor:
“Nestor, son of Neleus, great glory of the Achaians,
quick, get up on your chariot, let Machaon beside you
mount, and steer your single-foot horses to the ships in all speed.
A healer is a man worth many men in his knowledge

515 of cutting out arrows and putting kindly medicines on wounds.”
He spoke, and the Gerenian horseman Nestor obeyed him.
Immediately he mounted the chariot, and Machaon,
son of the great healer Asklepios, mounted beside him.
He lashed on the horses, and they winged their way unreluctant
520 back toward the hollow ships, since this was the way they desired.
Now Kebriones, who saw how the Trojans were being driven,
and who stood beside Hektor in the chariot, spoke a word to him:
“Hektor, you and I encounter the Danaäns at the utmost
edge of the sorrowful battle, but meanwhile the rest of the Trojans
525 are driven pell-mell upon each other, the men and their horses.
The Telamonian Aias drives them; I know him surely
for he carries the broad shield on his shoulders. So, let us also
steer our horses and chariot that way, since there the horsemen
and the foot-ranks more than elsewhere hurling the wicked war-hate
530 against each other, are destroying, and the ceaseless clamor has risen.”
So he spoke, and lashed forward the bright-maned horses
with the singing whip, and they at the feel of the stroke lightly
carried the running chariot among Achaians and Trojans,
trampling down dead men and shields, and the axle under
535 the chariot was all splashed with blood and the rails which encircled
the chariot, struck by flying drops from the feet of the horses,
from the running rims of the wheels. So Hektor was straining to plunge
in
the turmoil of men, and charge them and break them. He hurled the
confusion
of disaster upon the Danaäns, and stayed from the spear’s stroke
540 little, but with his spear and his sword and with huge stones flung
ranged about among the ranks of the rest of the fighters
yet kept clear still of the attack of Telamonian Aias.
But Zeus father who sits on high drove fear upon Aias.
He stood stunned, and swung the sevenfold ox-hide shield behind him

545 and drew back, throwing his eyes round the crowd of men, like a wild
beast,
turning on his way, shifting knee past knee only a little;
as when the men who live in the wild and their dogs have driven
a tawny lion away from the mid-fenced ground of their oxen,
and will not let him tear out the fat of the oxen, watching
550 nightlong against him, and he in his hunger for meat closes in
but can get nothing of what he wants, for the raining javelins
thrown from the daring hands of the men beat ever against him,
and the flaming torches, and these he balks at for all of his fury
and with the daylight goes away, disappointed of desire;
555 so Aias, disappointed at heart, drew back from the Trojans
much unwilling, but feared for the ships of the Achaians. As when
a donkey, stubborn and hard to move, goes into a cornfield
in despite of boys, and many sticks have been broken upon him,
but he gets in and goes on eating the deep grain, and the children
560 beat him with sticks, but their strength is infantile; yet at last
by hard work they drive him out when he is glutted with eating;
so the high-hearted Trojans and companions in arms gathered
from far places kept after great Aias, the son of Telamon,
stabbing always with their spears at the center of the great shield.
565 And now Aias would remember again his furious valor
and turn upon them, and beat back the battalions of Trojans,
breakers of horses, and then again would turn and run from them.
He blocked them all from making their way on to the fast ships
and himself stood and fought on in the space between the Achaians
570 and Trojans, and of the spears thrown by the daring hands of the
fighters
some that were driven forward stuck fast in the great shield, others
and many in the mid space before they had got to his white skin
stood fast in the ground, though they had been straining to reach his
body.
Now as Eurypylos the glorious son of Euaimon
575 saw how Aias was being overpowered by the dense spears,
he came and stood beside him and made a cast with his bright spear

and struck Apisaon, son of Phausias, shepherd of the people,
in the liver under the midriff, and at once took the strength from his
knees.
Eurypylos springing forward stripped the armor from his shoulders
580 but godlike Alexandros watched him as he was stripping
the armor of Apisaon, and at once drew his bow, and shot
at Eurypylos, and hit him in the right thigh with the arrow,
and the reed shaft was broken off, and his thigh was heavy with pain.
To avoid death he shrank into the host of his own companions.
585 He lifted his voice and called in a piercing cry to the Danaäns:
“Friends, O leaders and men of counsel among the Argives,
turn again and stand and beat off the pitiless death-day
from Aias, who is being overpowered with spears thrown; and I think
he cannot escape out of this sorrowful battle. Therefore
590 stand fast and face them around great Aias, the son of Telamon.”
So spoke wounded Eurypylos, and the others about him
stood in their numbers and sloped their shields over his shoulders,
holding
the spears away, and Aias came back to join them. He turned
and stood, when he had got back to the swarm of his own companions.

595

So they fought on in the likeness of blazing fire. And meanwhile
the horses of Neleus sweating carried Nestor away from
the fighting, and carried also the shepherd of the people, Machaon.
Now swift-footed brilliant Achilleus saw him and watched him,
for he was standing on the stern of his huge-hollowed vessel
600 looking out over the sheer war work and the sorrowful onrush.
At once he spoke to his own companion in arms, Patroklos,
calling from the ship, and he heard it from inside the shelter, and came
out
like the war god, and this was the beginning of his evil.
The strong son of Menoitios spoke first, and addressed him:
605 “What do you wish with me, Achilleus? Why do you call me?”
Then in answer again spoke Achilleus of the swift feet:

“Son of Menoitios, you who delight my heart, O great one,
now I think the Achaians will come to my knees and stay there
in supplication, for a need past endurance has come to them.
610 But go now, Patroklos beloved of Zeus, to Nestor
and ask him who is this wounded man he brings in from the fighting.
Indeed, seeing him from behind I thought he was like Machaon,
Asklepios’ son, in all ways, but I got no sight of the man’s face
since the horses were tearing forward and swept on by me.”
615 So he spoke, and Patroklos obeyed his beloved companion
and went on the run along the shelters and ships of the Achaians.
Now when the others came to the shelter of the son of Neleus,
they themselves dismounted to the prospering earth, and the henchman
Eurymedon unharnessed the horses of the old man
620 from the chariot. The men wiped off the sweat on their tunics
and stood to the wind beside the beach of the sea, and thereafter
went inside the shelter and took their places on settles.
And lovely-haired Hekamede made them a potion, she whom
the old man won from Tenedos, when Achilleus stormed it.
625 She was the daughter of great-hearted Arsinoös. The Achaians
chose her out for Nestor, because he was best of them all in counsel.
First she pushed up the table in front of them, a lovely
table, polished and with feet of cobalt, and on it
she laid a bronze basket, with onion to go with the drinking,
630 and pale honey, and beside it bread, blessed pride of the barley,
and beside it a beautifully wrought cup which the old man brought with
him
from home. It was set with golden nails, the eared handles upon it
were four, and on either side there were fashioned two doves
of gold, feeding, and there were double bases beneath it.
635 Another man with great effort could lift it full from the table,
but Nestor, aged as he was, lifted it without strain.
In this the woman like the immortals mixed them a potion
with Pramneian wine, and grated goat’s-milk cheese into it
with a bronze grater, and scattered with her hand white barley into it.
640 When she had got the potion ready, she told them to drink it,

and both when they had drunk it were rid of their thirst’s parching
and began to take pleasure in conversation, talking with each other,
and Patroklos came and stood, a godlike man, in the doorway.
Seeing him the old man started up from his shining
645 chair, and took him by the hand, led him in and told him to sit down,
but Patroklos from the other side declined, and spoke to him:
“No chair, aged sir beloved of Zeus. You will not persuade me.
Honored, and quick to blame, is the man who sent me to find out
who was this wounded man you were bringing. Now I myself
650 know, and I see it is Machaon, the shepherd of the people.
Now I go back as messenger to Achilleus, to tell him.
You know yourself, aged sir beloved of Zeus, how he is;
a dangerous man; he might even be angry with one who is guiltless.”
Then in turn the Gerenian horseman Nestor answered him:
655 “Now why is Achilleus being so sorry for the sons of the Achaians
who have been wounded with spears thrown, he who knows nothing
of the sorrow that has risen along the host, since the bravest
are lying up among the ships with arrow or spear wounds
The son of Tydeus, strong Diomedes, was hit by an arrow,
660 and Odysseus has a pike wound, and Agamemnon the spear-famed,
and Eurypylos has been wounded in the thigh with an arrow. And even
now
I have brought this other one, Machaon, out of the fighting
hit by an arrow from the bowstring. Meanwhile Achilleus
brave as he is cares nothing for the Danaäns nor pities them.
665 Is he going to wait then till the running ships by the water
are burned with consuming fire for all the Argives can do, till
we ourselves are killed one after another? Since there is not
any longer in my gnarled limbs the strength that there once was.
If only I were young now, and the strength still steady within me,
670 as that time when a quarrel was made between us and the Eleians
over a driving of cattle, when I myself killed Itymoneus,
the brave son of Hypeirochos who made his home in Elis.
I was driving cattle in reprisal, and he, as he was defending

his oxen, was struck among the foremost by a spear thrown from my
hand
675 and fell, and his people who live in the wild fled in terror about him.
And we got and drove off together much spoil from this pastureland:
fifty herds of oxen, as many sheepflocks, as many
droves of pigs, and again as many wide-ranging goatflocks,
and a hundred and fifty brown horses, mares all of them
680 and many with foals following underneath. And all there
we drove inside the keep of Neleian Pylos, making
our way nightwise to the town. And Neleus was glad in his heart
that so much had come my way, who was young to go to the fighting.
And next day as dawn showed the heralds lifted their clear cry
685 for all to come who had anything owed them in shining Elis.
And the men who were chiefs among the Pylians assembling
divided the spoil. There were many to whom the Epeians owed
something
since we in Pylos were few and we had been having the worst of it.
For Herakles had come in his strength against us and beaten us
690 in the years before, and all the bravest among us had been killed.
For we who were sons of lordly Neleus had been twelve, and now
I alone was left of these, and all the others had perished,
and grown haughty over this the bronze-armored Epeians
despised and outraged us, and devised wicked actions against us.
695 Now the old man took for himself a herd of cattle and a big flock
of sheep, choosing out three hundred of them along with the shepherds;
for indeed a great debt was owing to him in shining Elis.
It was four horses, race-competitors with their own chariot,
who were on their way to a race and were to run for a tripod,
700 but Augeias the lord of men took these, and kept them
and sent away their driver who was vexed for the sake of the horses.
Now aged Neleus, angry over things said and things done,
took a vast amount for himself, and gave the rest to the people
to divide among them, so none might go away without a just share.

705

So we administered all this spoil, and all through the city
wrought sacrifices to the gods; and on the third day the Epeians
came all against us, numbers of men and single-foot horses
in full haste, and among them were armored the two Moliones,
boys still, not yet altogether skilled in furious fighting.
710 There is a city, Thryoessa, a headlong hill town
far away by the Alpheios at the bottom of sandy Pylos.
They had thrown their encampment about that place, furious to smash
it.
But when they had swept the entire plain, Athene came running
to us, a messenger from Olympos by night, and warned us
715 to arm. It was no hesitant host she assembled in Pylos
but people straining hard toward the battle. Now Neleus would not
let me be armed among them, and had hidden away my horses
because he thought I was not yet skilled in the work of warfare.
Even so I was pre-eminent among our own horsemen
720 though I went on foot; since thus Athene guided the battle.
There is a river, Minyeïos, which empties its water
in the sea beside Arene. There we waited for the divine Dawn,
we horsemen among the Pylians, and the hordes of the streaming footsoldiers,
and from there having armed in all speed and formed in our armor
725 we came by broad daylight to the sacred stream of Alpheios.
There we wrought fine sacrifices to Zeus in his great strength
and sacrificed a bull to Alpheios, a bull to Poseidon,
but to Athene of the gray eyes a cow from the herds. Then
we took our dinner along the host in divided watches
730 and went to sleep, each man in his own armor, by the current
of the river, and meanwhile the high-hearted Epeians
had taken their places around the city, furious to smash it.
But sooner than this there was shown forth a great work of the war god,
for when the sun in his shining lifted above the earth, then
735 we joined our battle together, with prayers to Zeus and Athene.
Now when the battle came on between Pylians and Epeians,
I was first to kill a man, and I won his single-foot horses.

It was Moulios the spearman who was son-in-law to Augeias
and had as wife his eldest daughter, fair-haired Agamede
740 who knew of all the medicines that are grown in the broad earth.
As he came on I threw and hit him with the bronze-headed spear
and he dropped in the dust, whereupon I springing into his chariot
took my place among the champions, as the high-hearted Epeians
fled one way and another in terror when they saw the man fall
745 who was leader of their horsemen and the best of them all in fighting.
Then I charged upon them like a black whirlwind, and overtook
fifty chariots, and for each of the chariots two men
caught the dirt in their teeth beaten down under my spear.
And now I would have killed the young Moliones, scions
750 of Aktor, had not their father who shakes the earth in his wide strength
caught them out of the battle, shrouding them in a thick mist.
Then Zeus gave huge power into the hands of the Pylians,
for we chased them on over the hollow plain, killing
the men themselves, and picking up their magnificent armor
755 until we brought our horses to Bouprasion of the wheatfields
and the Olenian rock, where there is a hill called the hill
of Alesios. There at last Athene turned back our people.
There I killed my last man and left him. There the Achaians
steered back from Bouprasion to Pylos their fast-running horses,
760 and all glorified Zeus among the gods, but among men Nestor.
That was I, among men, if it ever happened. But Achilleus
will enjoy his own valor in loneliness, though I think
he will weep much, too late, when his people are perished from him.
Dear child, surely this was what Menoitios told you
765 that day when he sent you out from Phthia to Agamemnon.
We two, brilliant Odysseus and I, were inside with you
and listened carefully to everything, all that he told you.
For we had come to the strong-established house of Peleus
assembling fighting men all through generous Achaia. We came
770 there, and found the hero Menoitios inside, and you,
Achilleus beside you, and Peleus the aged horseman was burning
the fat thigh pieces of an ox to Zeus who delights in the thunder

in the garth of the courtyard. He was holding a golden beaker
and pouring the bright wine over the burning dedications. You two
775 were over the meat of the ox attending to it, and we came
and stood in the forecourt, and Achilleus sprang up wondering
and took us by the hand and led us in, and told us to sit down,
and set hospitality properly before us, as is the stranger’s
right. Now when we had taken our pleasure of eating and drinking
780 I began to talk, and invited you both to come with us,
and you were altogether willing, and your fathers spoke to you.
And Peleus the aged was telling his own son, Achilleus,
to be always best in battle and pre-eminent beyond all others,
but for you, Menoitios, Aktor’s son, had this to say to you:
785 ‘My child, by right of blood Achilleus is higher than you are,
but you are the elder. Yet in strength he is far the greater.
You must speak solid words to him, and give him good counsel,
and point his way. If he listens to you it will be for his own good.’
This is what the old man told you, you have forgotten. Yet even
790 now you might speak to wise Achilleus, he might be persuaded.
Who knows if, with God helping, you might trouble his spirit
by entreaty, since the persuasion of a friend is a strong thing.
But if he is drawing back from some prophecy known in his own heart
and by Zeus’ will his honored mother has told him of something,
795 let him send you out, at least, and the rest of the Myrmidon people
follow you, and you may be a light given to the Danaäns.
And let him give you his splendid armor to wear to the fighting,
if perhaps the Trojans might think you are he, and give way
from their attack, and the fighting sons of the Achaians get wind
800 again after hard work. There is little breathing space in the fighting.
You, unwearied, might with a mere cry pile men wearied
back upon their city, and away from the ships and the shelters.”
So he spoke, and stirred the feeling in the breast of Patroklos,
and he went on the run along the ships to the son of Aiakos,
805 Achilleus. But as Patroklos came in his running to the ships
of great Odysseus, where the Achaians had their assembly and dealt out
rights, and where were established their altars to the immortals,

there Eurypylos, who had been wounded in the thigh with an arrow,
met him, the illustrious son of Euaimon, limping
810 away from the battle, and the watery sweat was running
down his shoulders and face, and from the sore wound dark blood
continued to drip, and yet the will stayed steady within him.
And the strong son of Menoitios looked on him in pity
and was sorrowful over him, and addressed him in winged words:
815 “Poor wretches, you leaders and men of counsel among the Danaäns,
was it your fate then, far from your friends and the land of your fathers,
to glut with your shining fat the running dogs here in Troy land
But tell me this, my lord Eurypylos grown under God’s hand:
will the Achaians somehow be able to hold huge Hektor
820 or must they now perish beaten down under his spear?”
Then Eurypylos who was wounded answered him in turn:
“No longer, illustrious Patroklos, can the Achaians
defend themselves, but they will be piled back into their black ships.
For all of these who were before the bravest in battle
825 are lying up among the ships with arrow or spear wounds
under the hands of the Trojans whose strength is forever on the uprise.
But help save me now at least, leading me away to my black ship,
and cut the arrow out of my thigh, wash the dark blood running
out of it with warm water, and put kind medicines on it,
830 good ones, which they say you have been told of by Achilleus,
since Cheiron, most righteous of the Centaurs, told him about them.
As for Machaon and Podaleirios, who are healers,
I think Machaon has got a wound, and is in the shelters
lying there, and himself is in need of a blameless healer,
835 while the other in the plain is standing the bitter attack of the Trojans.”
Then in turn the strong son of Menoitios spoke to him:
“But how shall this be, my lord Eurypylos, how shall we do it?
I am on my way carrying a message to wise Achilleus
given me by Gerenian Nestor, the Achaians’ watcher.
840 But even so I will not leave you in your affliction.”
He spoke, and holding the shepherd of the host under the arms led
him
to his shelter, and a henchman seeing them spread out some ox-hides,

and Patroklos laid him there and with a knife cut the sharp tearing
arrow out of his thigh, and washed the black blood running from it
845 with warm water, and, pounding it up in his hands, laid on
a bitter root to make pain disappear, one which stayed
all kinds of pain. And the wound dried, and the flow of blood stopped.

BOOK TWELVE

5

10

15

20

25

So within the shelter the warlike son of Menoitios
tended stricken Eurypylos, and meanwhile the Argives
and Trojans fought on in massed battle, nor was the Danaäns’
ditch going to hold them back nor the wide wall above it
they had built for the sake of their ships, and driven a deep ditch
about it, and had not given to the gods grand sacrifices
so that it might guard their running ships and their masses
of spoil within it. It had been built in despite of the immortal
gods, and therefore it was not to stand firm for a long time.
So long as Hektor was still alive, and Achilleus was angry,
so long as the citadel of lord Priam was a city untaken,
for this time the great wall of the Achaians stood firm. But afterward
when all the bravest among the Trojans had died in the fighting,
and many of the Argives had been beaten down, and some left,
when in the tenth year the city of Priam was taken
and the Argives gone in their ships to the beloved land of their fathers,
then at last Poseidon and Apollo took counsel
to wreck the wall, letting loose the strength of rivers upon it,
all the rivers that run to the sea from the mountains of Ida,
Rhesos and Heptaporos, Karesos and Rhodios,
Grenikos and Aisepos, and immortal Skamandros,
and Simoeis, where much ox-hide armor and helmets were tumbled
in the river mud, and many of the race of the half-god mortals.
Phoibos Apollo turned the mouths of these waters together
and nine days long threw the flood against the wall, and Zeus rained
incessantly, to break the wall faster and wash it seaward.
And the shaker of the earth himself holding in his hands the trident
guided them, and hurled into the waves all the bastions’ strengthening

of logs and stones the toiling Achaians had set in position
30 and made all smooth again by the hard-running passage of Helle
and once again piled the great beach under sand, having wrecked
the wall, and turned the rivers again to make their way down
the same channel where before they had run the bright stream of their
water.
Thus, afterward, Poseidon and Apollo were minded
35 to put things in place, but at this time battle and clamor were blazing
about the strong-founded wall and the bastion timbers were thundering
as they were struck, as the Argives broken under Zeus’ lashing
were crowded back on their hollow ships, and struggled to get clear
in dread of Hektor, the strong one who drove men to thoughts of panic.
40 But Hektor, as he had before, fought on like a whirlwind.
As when among a pack of hounds and huntsmen assembled
a wild boar or lion turns at bay in the strength of his fury,
and the men, closing themselves into a wall about him,
stand up to face him, and cast at him with the volleying spears thrown
45 from their hands, and in spite of this the proud heart feels not
terror, nor turns to run, and it is his own courage that kills him;
and again and again he turns on them trying to break the massed men
and wherever he charges the masses of men break away in front of him;
such was Hektor as he went through the battle and rallied his
companions
50 and drove them on to cross over the ditch, but now the fast-footed
horses balked at the edge of the lip, and dared not cross, whinnying
loud, since the ditch in its great width frightened them from it,
being not easy for them to overleap, nor to walk through,
since along the whole length the jut of the overhangs stood
55 on both sides, and the surface of the floor was thickset with pointed
palisades, which the sons of the Achaians had paled there
dense and huge, so as to hold off the rage of attackers.
And a horse straining at the strong-wheeled chariot might not easily
enter there, but the dismounted were strong in their effort.
60 And now Poulydamas stood beside bold Hektor, and spoke to him:
“Hektor, and other lords of the Trojans and companions in battle,

we are senseless trying to drive our fast-footed horses over
this ditch. It is hard indeed to cross, and sharp stakes are planted
inside it, and across from these the wall of the Achaians.
65 There, there is no way to get down, no way again to do battle
from horses, for the passage is narrow and I think they must be hurt
there.
For now if Zeus who thunders on high in evil intention
toward these is destroying them utterly, sending aid to the Trojans,
this is the way I would wish it, may it happen immediately
70 that the Achaians be destroyed here forgotten and far from
Argos; but if they turn again and a backrush comes on us
out of the ships, and we are driven against the deep ditch,
then I think no longer could one man to carry a message
get clear to the city, once the Achaians have turned back upon us.
75 Come then, do as I say, let us all be persuaded; let us
tell our henchmen to check our horses here by the ditch, then
let ourselves, all of us dismounted and armed in our war gear,
follow Hektor in mass formation. As for the Achaians,
they will not hold, if the bonds of death are fastened upon them.”
80

So spoke Poulydamas, and this counsel of safety pleased Hektor
And at once in all his armor he leapt to the ground from his chariot,
and the rest of the Trojans assembled, not mounted behind their horses,
but all sprang to the ground, when they saw brilliant Hektor had done
it.
Then each man gave orders to his own charioteer
85 to check the horses in good order at the edge of the ditch,
and the fighters formed apart into groups, then closing together
into five well-ordered battalions followed their leaders.
They who went with Hektor and Poulydamas the blameless,
these were most numerous, and bravest, and beyond others furious
90 to smash the wall and fight their way among the hollow ships,
and Kebriones went with them as third man, while by the chariots
Hektor had left another man, not so good as Kebriones.
Paris led the next group with Alkaïthoös and Agenor,
and Helenos, with godlike Deïphobos, led the third group,

95 sons both of Priam, and Asios was with them as third man,
Asios, son of Hyrtakos, whom his tall shining horses
had carried over from Arisbe and beside the river Selleëis.
The leader of the fourth group was the strong son of Anchises,
Aineias, and with him were the two sons of Antenor,
100 Archelochos and Akamas, both skilled in all fighting.
Sarpedon led the far-renowned companions in battle,
and had chosen to go with him Glaukos and warlike Asteropaios
since these seemed to him to be marked out as the bravest
of the rest, after himself, but among all he was pre-eminent.
105 Now when these had closed their wrought ox-hide shields together
they charged straight for the Danaäns, eagerly, with no thought longer
of being held, but rather to hurl themselves on the black ships.
Then the rest of the Trojans and renowned companions in battle
were willing to follow the order of blameless Poulydamas. Only
110 Asios, Hyrtakos’ son, lord of men, was unwilling
to leave his horses there and a charioteer to attend them
but kept them with him, and so drove on at the fast-running vessels,
poor fool, who by the ships in the pride of his horses and chariot
was not destined to evade the evil spirits of destruction
115 nor ever to make his way back again to windy Ilion.
Before this the dark-named destiny had shrouded about him
through the spear of Idomeneus, proud son of Deukalion.
For he sent his horses to the left of the ships, where the Achaians
were streaming back from the level ground with horses and chariots,
120 and this way he drove his chariot and horses, and found there
the leaves not yet pushed home in the gates, nor the long door-bar,
but men were holding them wide apart, on the chance of rescuing
some one of their companions running for the ships from the battle.
Of a purpose he steered his horses straight there, and his men followed
125 screaming aloud, since they thought the Achaians no longer
would hold, but that they would be driven back on their dark ships.
Fools! since in the gates they found two men of the bravest,
high-hearted sons of the spear-fighting Lapithai, one
the son of Peirithoös, powerful Polypoites,

130 and one Leonteus, a man like the murderous god of battles.
Now these two, who had taken their place in front of the high gates,
stood there like two oaks who rear their crests in the mountains
and through day upon day stand up to the wind and the rainbeat
since their great roots reach far and are gripped in the ground. So
135 these two, in the confidence of their strength and their hands’ work,
stood up to tall Asios advancing upon them, nor gave way.
But these, holding up high the tanned leather of their shields, moved
straight in on the strong-built wall with enormous clamor
around Asios their lord and Iamenos and Orestes,
140 and Asios’ son Adamas, and Oinomaos and Thoön.
In this time the Lapithai still inside the wall were striving
to stir up the strong-greaved Achaians to defend the vessels,
but among the Danaäns, when they saw the Trojans sweeping
on against the wall, a clamor arose, and they gave way;
145 and the two bursting through the gates fought on in front of them.
They were in the likeness of two wild boars who in the mountains
await a rabble of men and dogs advancing upon them
and as they go tearing slantwise and rip the timber about them
to pieces at the stock, the grinding scream of their teeth sounds
150 high, until some man hits them with his throw and takes the life from
them;
such was the grinding scream from the bright bronze covering their
chests
struck hard on by spears, for they fought a very strong battle
in the confidence of their own strength and the people above them.
These flung about them with great stones torn from the strong-founded
155 bastions, as they fought in defense of themselves, and the shelters,
and the fast-running vessels, so that the flung stones dropped to the
ground
like snowflakes which the winds’ blast whirling the shadowy clouds
drifts in their abundance along the prospering earth. So
the missiles flung from the hands of Achaians, and Trojans also,
160 went showering, and the helms and shields massive in the middle
crashed hollow underneath the impact of rocks like millstones.

And now Asios, Hyrtakos’ son, groaned aloud and beat on
both thighs with his hands, and spoke aloud in his agony:
“Zeus father, now even you are made utterly a lover
165 of deception. For I never thought the fighting Achaians
would be able to hold our strength and our hands invincible.
But they, as wasps quick-bending in the middle, or as bees
will make their homes at the side of the rocky way, and will not
abandon the hollow house they have made, but stand up to
170 men who come to destroy them, and fight for the sake of their children,
so these, though they are only two, are unwilling to give back
from the gates, until they have killed their men, or are taken.”
He spoke, but by such talk did not persuade the heart of Zeus
whose desire it was to extend the glory to Hektor.

175

And now at the various gates various men fought each other.
It were too much toil for me, as if I were a god, to tell all this,
for all about the stone wall the inhuman strength of the fire
was rising, and the Argives fought unhappily, yet they must fight
on, to defend their ships. And all the gods who were helpers
180 of the Danaäns in the fighting were dejected in spirit.
But the Lapithai fought on and closed in the hateful fighting,
and there the son of Peirithoös, powerful Polypoites,
struck Damasos with the spear through the bronze-sided helmet,
and the brazen helmet could not hold, but the bronze spearhead
185 driven on through smashed the bone apart, and the inward
brain was all spattered forth. So he beat him down in his fury.
Then he went on to kill Pylon and Ormenos. Meanwhile
Leonteus, the scion of Ares, struck down Antimachos’
son, Hippomachos, with a spear cast into the war belt
190 and afterward drawing his sharp sword out of the scabbard
made a rush through the crowding men, and struck from close up
Antiphates first, so that he crashed on his back to the ground, then
beat down along the prospering earth Menon and Orestes

and Iamenos, all beaten down in rapid succession.

195

Now as these were stripping their men of the shining armor,
the fighting men following with Poulydamas and Hektor,
who were most numerous, and bravest, and beyond others furious
to smash the wall, and set fire to the vessels, these still
were divided in doubt as they stood there at the ditch’s edge.
200 As they were urgent to cross a bird sign had appeared to them,
an eagle, flying high and holding to the left of the people
and carrying in its talons a gigantic snake, blood-colored,
alive still and breathing, it had not forgotten its warcraft
yet, for writhing back it struck the eagle that held it
205 by chest and neck, so that the eagle let it drop groundward
in pain of the bite, and dashed it down in the midst of the battle
and itself, screaming high, winged away down the wind’s blast.
And the Trojans shivered with fear as they looked on the lithe snake
lying in their midst, a portent of Zeus of the aegis.
210 And now Poulydamas stood beside bold Hektor and spoke to him:
“Hektor, somehow in assembly you move ever against me
though I speak excellently, since indeed there is no good reason
for you, in your skill, to argue wrong, neither in the councils
nor in the fighting, and ever to be upholding your own cause.
215 Now once more I will speak out the way it seems best to me.
Let us not go on and fight the Danaäns by their ships. I think
it will end as the portent was accomplished, if the bird sign
that came to the Trojans as we were trying to cross was a true one,
an eagle, flying high and holding to the left of the people
220 and carrying in its talons a gigantic snake, blood-colored,
alive, but let it drop suddenly before winning his own home,
and could not finish carrying it back to give to his children.
So we, even though in our great strength we break in the gates
and the wall of the Achaians, and the Achaians give way before us,
225 we shall not take the same ways back from the ships in good order;
since we shall leave many Trojans behind us, whom the Achaians

will cut down with the bronze as they fight for themselves by their
vessels.
So an interpreter of the gods would answer, one who knew
in his mind the truth of portents, and whom the people believed in.”
230 Looking darkly at him tall Hektor of the shining helm answered:
“Poulydamas, these things that you argue please me no longer.
Your mind knows how to contrive a saying better than this one.
But if in all seriousness this is your true argument, then
it is the very gods who ruined the brain within you,
235 you who are telling me to forget the counsels of thunderous
Zeus, in which he himself nodded his head to me and assented.
But you: you tell me to put my trust in birds, who spread
wide their wings. I care nothing for these, I think nothing of them,
nor whether they go by on our right against dawn and sunrise
or go by to the left against the glooming mist and the darkness.
240 No, let us put our trust in the counsel of great Zeus, he who
is lord over all mortal men and all the immortals.
One bird sign is best: to fight in defense of our country.
Why are you so afraid of war and hostility?
Eve?
245 though all the rest of us were to be cut down around you
among the Argive ships, you would run no danger of dying
since your heart is not enduring in battle nor a fighter’s.
But if you shrink away from the murderous work, or turn back
some other man from the fighting, beguiling him with your arguments,
250 at once beaten down under my spear you will lose your own life.”
He spoke, and led the way, and the rest of them came on after him
with unearthly clamor, and over them Zeus who delights in the thunder
drove down from among the hills of Ida the blast of a windstorm
which swept the dust straight against the ships. He was mazing the
minds
255 of the Achaians, and giving glory to the Trojans and Hektor,
and they in the confidence of the portents shown, and their own
strength,
worked to break down the great wall of the Achaians. They tore

at the projections on the outworks, and broke down the battlements
and shook with levers the jut of the buttresses the Achaians
260 had stuck in the earth on the outer face to shore their defenses.
They tore at these, in hope of breaking down the Achaians’
wall, but now the Danaäns did not give way in front of them,
but they, fencing the battlements with the hides of oxen,
hurled from the wall at the enemy who came on beneath it.

265

The two Aiantes, walking up and down the length of the ramparts,
urged the men on, stirring up the warcraft of the Achaians,
and stung them along, using kind words to one, to another
hard ones, whenever they saw a man hang back from the fighting:
“Dear friends, you who are pre-eminent among the Argives, you who
270 are of middle estate, you who are of low account, since
all of us are not alike in battle, this is work for all now,
and you yourselves can see it. Now let no man let himself
be turned back upon the ships for the sound of their blustering
but keep forever forward calling out courage to each other.
275 So may Olympian Zeus who grips the thunderbolt grant us
a way to the city, when we beat off the attack of our enemies.”
Such was their far cry, and they stirred the Achaians’ war strength.
And they, as storms of snow descend to the ground incessant
on a winter day, when Zeus of the counsels, showing
280 before men what shafts he possesses, brings on a snowstorm
and stills the winds asleep in the solid drift, enshrouding
the peaks that tower among the mountains and the shoulders outjutting,
and the low lands with their grasses, and the prospering work of men’s
hands,
and the drift falls along the gray sea, the harbors and beaches,
285 and the surf that breaks against it is stilled, and all things elsewhere
it shrouds from above, with the burden of Zeus’ rain heavy upon it;
so numerous and incessant were the stones volleyed from both sides,

some thrown on Trojans, others flung against the Achaians
by Trojans, so the whole length of the wall thundered beneath them.

290

And not even then might the Trojans and glorious Hektor
have broken in the gates of the rampart, and the long door-bar,
had not Zeus of the counsels driven his own son, Sarpedon,
upon the Argives, like a lion among horn-curved cattle.
Presently he held before him the perfect circle of his shield,
295 a lovely thing of beaten bronze, which the bronze-smith hammered
out for him, and on the inward side had stitched ox-hides
in close folds with golden staples clean round the circle.
Holding this shield in front of him, and shaking two spears,
he went onward like some hill-kept lion, who for a long time
300 has gone lacking meat, and the proud heart is urgent upon him
to get inside of a close steading and go for the sheepflocks.
And even though he finds herdsmen in that place, who are watching
about their sheepflocks, armed with spears, and with dogs, even so
he has no thought of being driven from the steading without some
attack made,
305 and either makes his spring and seizes a sheep, or else
himself is hit in the first attack by a spear from a swift hand
thrown. So now his spirit drove on godlike Sarpedon
to make a rush at the wall and break apart the battlements.
And now he spoke in address to Glaukos, son of Hippolochos:
310 “Glaukos, why is it you and I are honored before others
with pride of place, the choice meats and the filled wine cups
in Lykia, and all men look on us as if we were immortals,
and we are appointed a great piece of land by the banks of Xanthos,
good land, orchard and vineyard, and ploughland for the planting of
wheat?
315 Therefore it is our duty in the forefront of the Lykians
to take our stand, and bear our part of the blazing of battle,
so that a man of the close-armored Lykians may say of us:
‘Indeed, these are no ignoble men who are lords of Lykia,

these kings of ours, who feed upon the fat sheep appointed
320 and drink the exquisite sweet wine, since indeed there is strength
of valor in them, since they fight in the forefront of the Lykians.
’ Man, supposing you and I, escaping this battle,
would be able to live on forever, ageless, immortal,
so neither would I myself go on fighting in the foremost
325 nor would I urge you into the fighting where men win glory.
But now, seeing that the spirits of death stand close about us
in their thousands, no man can turn aside nor escape them,
let us go on and win glory for ourselves, or yield it to others.”
He spoke, nor did Glaukos disobey him nor turn aside from him.
330 They, leading the great horde of the Lykians, advanced straight
onward,
and the son of Peteos, Menestheus, shivered as he saw them
since they came against his bastion and carried disaster upon it.
He scanned the rampart of the Achaians in the hope of seeing
some great chief who could beat back the bane from his company,
335 and saw the two Aiantes, insatiate of battle, standing
on the wall, and Teukros even now coming up from the shelter,
and close by, but he was not able to cry out and make them
hear, so great was the clamor about him as the shouts hit skyward,
as shields were battered with missiles, and the helmets crested with
horse- hair,
340 and the gates, which all had been slammed shut, and the Trojans
standing
against them were trying to break them down and force their way in.
At once he sent Thoötes off as a runner to Aias:
“Go on the run, brilliant Thoötes, and call Aias here,
or better, both Aiantes, since that would be far the best thing
345 that could happen, since here headlong destruction is building against
us.
Such is the weight of the Lykian lords upon us, who even
before now have shown as deadly men in the strong encounters.
But if in their place also hard work and fury have arisen,
at least let powerful Telamonian Aias come by himself,

350 and let Teukros follow with him, with his craft in the bow’s use.”
He spoke, nor did the herald disobey when he heard him,
but went on the run along the wall of the bronze-armored Achaians
and came and stood by the two Aiantes, and spoke to them straight out:
“Aiantes, leaders of the bronze-armored Argives: Menestheus,
355 beloved son of Peteos engendered of Zeus, desires you
to go where he is and meet the danger, if only for a little;
both of you for choice, since that would be far the best thing
that could happen, since there headlong destruction is building against
him.
Such is the weight of the Lykian lords upon him, who even
360 before now have shown as deadly men in the strong encounters.
But if in this place also hard fighting and fury have arisen,
at least let powerful Telamonian Aias come by himself
and let Teukros follow with him, with his craft in the bow’s use.”
He spoke, and huge Telamonian Aias did not disobey him,
365 but at once called out in winged words to Aias, the son of Oïleus:
“Aias, now you two, yourself and strong Lykomedes,
must stand your ground and urge on the Danaäns to fight strongly.
I am going over there to meet the attack, and afterward
I will come back soon, when I have beaten them back from the others.”
370 So speaking Telamonian Aias went away, and with him
went Teukros, his brother by the same father, and following them
was Pandion, who carried the curved bow for Teukros.
They kept inside the wall as they went, till they came to the bastion
of high-hearted Menestheus, and found men who were hard pressed
there,
375 for the strong lords and men of counsel among the Lykians
came on against the battlements like a darkening stormwind,
and they charged forward to fight with these, and the clamor rose high.
First to kill his man was Telamonian Aias.
It was Sarpedon’s companion in arms, high-hearted Epikles,
380 whom he struck with a great jagged stone, that lay at the inside
of the wall, huge, on top of the battlements. A man could not easily
hold it, not even if he were very strong, in both hands,

of men such as men are now, but he heaving it high threw it,
and smashed in the four-sheeted helm, and pounded to pieces
385 the bones of the head inside it, so that Epikles dropped
like a diver from the high bastion, and the life left his bones.
And Teukros with an arrow struck the strong son of Hippolochos,
Glaukos, as he was swarming aloft the wall’s high bastion,
where he saw the arm was bare of defense, and stayed his warcraft;
390 he sprang down from the wall, secretly, for fear some Achaian
might see that he had been hit and vaunt with high words over him.
Sarpedon, as soon as he was aware that Glaukos had gone back,
was downcast, nevertheless he did not forget his warcraft
but striking with his spear at Alkmaon, the son of Thestor,
395 stabbed him, then wrenched the spear out, and he following the spear
fell
on his face, and the armor elaborate with bronze clashed about him.
And Sarpedon, grabbing in both ponderous hands the battlements,
pulled, and the whole thing came away in his hands, and the rampart
was stripped defenseless above. He had opened a pathway for many.
400 Aias and Teukros aimed at him together, and Teukros
hit him with an arrow in the shining belt that encircled
his chest to hold the man-covering shield, but Zeus brushed the death
spirits
from his son, and would not let him be killed there beside the ships’
sterns;
and Aias plunging upon him stabbed at the shield, but the spearhead
405 did not pass clean through. Still, he pounded him back in his fury
so that he gave back a little space from the battlement, and yet not
utterly gave way, since his heart was still hopeful of winning glory.
He whirled about and called aloud to the godlike Lykians:
“Lykians, why do you thus let go of your furious valor?
410 It is a hard thing for me, strong as I am, to break down
the wall, single-handed, and open a path to the vessels.
Come on with me then. This work is better if many do it.”
So he spoke, and they, awed at the reproach of their leader,
put on the pressure of more weight around their lord of the counsels.

415 And on the other side the Argives stiffened their battalions
inside the wall, and a huge fight developed between the two sides.
For neither could the powerful Lykians break in the rampart
of the Danaäns, and so open a path through to the vessels,
nor had the Danaän spearmen strength to push back the Lykians
420 from the rampart, once they had won to a place close under it;
but as two men with measuring ropes in their hands fight bitterly
about a boundary line at the meeting place of two cornfields,
and the two of them fight in the strait place over the rights of division,
so the battlements held these armies apart, and across them
425 they hewed at each other, and at the ox-hide shields strong-circled
guarding men’s chests, and at the fluttering straps of the guard-skins.
Many were torn in their white flesh by the bronze without pity
wherever one of the fighters turning aside laid bare
his back, and many were struck with the spear carried clean through the
shield.
430 Everywhere the battlements and the bastions were awash
with men’s blood shed from both sides, Achaian and Trojan.
But even so they could not drive panic among the Achaians,
but held evenly as the scales which a careful widow
holds, taking it by the balance beam, and weighs her wool evenly
435 at either end, working to win a pitiful wage for her children:
so the battles fought by both sides were pulled fast and even
until that time when Zeus gave the greater glory to Hektor,
Priam’s son, who was first to break into the wall of the Achaians.
For he lifted his voice and called in a piercing cry to the Trojans:
440 “Rise up, Trojans, breakers of horses, and wreck the ramparts
of the Argives, and let loose the inhuman fire on their vessels.”
So he spoke, driving them on, and they all gave ear to him
and steered against the wall in a pack, and at once gripping
still their edged spears caught and swarmed up the wall’s projections.
445 Meanwhile Hektor snatched up a stone that stood before the gates
and carried it along; it was blunt-massed at the base, but the upper
end was sharp; two men, the best in all a community,
could not easily hoist it up from the ground to a wagon,

of men such as men are now, but he alone lifted and shook it
450 as the son of devious-devising Kronos made it light for him.
As when a shepherd easily carries the fleece of a wether,
picking it up with one hand, and little is the burden weighting him,
so Hektor lifting the stone carried it straight for the door leaves
which filled the gateway ponderously close-fitted together.
455 These were high and twofold, and double door-bars on the inside
overlapping each other closed it, and a single pin-bolt secured them.
He came and stood very close and taking a strong wide stance threw
at the middle, leaning into the throw, that the cast might not lack
force, and smashed the hinges at either side, and the stone crashed
460 ponderously in, and the gates groaned deep, and the door-bars
could not hold, but the leaves were smashed to a wreckage of splinters
under the stone’s impact. Then glorious Hektor burst in
with dark face like sudden night, but he shone with the ghastly
glitter of bronze that girded his skin, and carried two spears
465 in his hands. No one could have stood up against him, and stopped
him,
except the gods, when he burst in the gates; and his eyes flashed fire.
Whirling, he called out across the battle to the Trojans
to climb over the wall, and they obeyed his urgency.
Immediately some swarmed over the wall, while others swept in
470 through the wrought gateways, and the Danaäns scattered in terror
among their hollow ships, and clamor incessant rose up.

BOOK THIRTEEN

5

10

When Zeus had driven against the ships the Trojans and Hektor,
he left them beside these to endure the hard work and sorrow
of fighting without respite, and himself turned his eyes shining
far away, looking out over the land of the Thracian riders
and the Mysians who fight at close quarters, and the proud
Hippomolgoi,
drinkers of milk, and the Abioi, most righteous of all men.
He did not at all now turn his shining eyes upon Troy land
for he had no idea in mind that any one of the immortals
would come down to stand by either Danaäns or Trojans.

Neither did the powerful shaker of the earth keep blind watch;
for he sat and admired the fighting and the run of the battle,
aloft on top of the highest summit of timbered Samos,
the Thracian place; and from there all Ida appeared before him,
and the city of Priam was plain to see, and the ships of the Achaians.
15 There he came up out of the water, and sat, and pitied the Achaians
who were beaten by the Trojans, and blamed Zeus for it in bitterness.
So presently he came down from the craggy mountain, striding
on rapid feet, and the tall mountains trembled and the timber
under the immortal feet of Poseidon’s progress.
20 He took three long strides forward, and in the fourth came to his goal,
Aigai, where his glorious house was built in the waters’
depth, glittering with gold, imperishable forever.
Going there he harnessed under his chariot his bronze-shod horses,
flying-footed, with long manes streaming of gold; and he put on

25 clothing of gold about his own body, and took up the golden
lash, carefully compacted, and climbed up into his chariot
and drove it across the waves. And about him the sea beasts came up
from their deep places and played in his path, and acknowledged their
master,
and the sea stood apart before him, rejoicing. The horses winged on
30 delicately, and the bronze axle beneath was not wetted.
The fast-running horses carried him to the ships of the Achaians.
There is a cave, broad and deep down in the gloom of the water,
lying midway between Tenedos and Imbros of the high cliffs.
There Poseidon the shaker of the earth reined in his horses,
35 and slipped them from the yoke, and threw fodder immortal before
them
so they could eat, and threw around their feet golden hobbles
not to be broken or slipped from, so they would wait there steadfast
for their lord gone. And Poseidon went to the ships of the Achaians.
40

45

50

55

But the Trojans, gathered into a pack, like flame, like a stormcloud,
came on after Hektor the son of Priam, raging relentless,
roaring and crying as one, and their hopes ran high of capturing
the ships of the Achaians, and killing the best men beside them,
all of them. But Poseidon who circles the earth and shakes it
rose up out of the deep water to stir on the Argives,
likening himself in form and weariless voice to Kalchas.
First he spoke to the Aiantes, who were burning for battle already:
“Aiantes, you two, remembering the spirit of warcraft
and not that of shivering panic, must save the Achaian people.
Elsewhere in truth I do not fear the Trojans’ invincible
hands, though in full force they have swarmed over our great wall;
since the strong-greaved Achaians will be able to hold the rest of them.
But I fear most terribly disaster to us in the one place
where that berserk flamelike leads them against us, Hektor,
who claims he must be son of Zeus of the high strength. May this
be the message some one of the gods gives your minds to carry,
that you stand fast strongly yourselves, urge the rest to stand also.

60

65

70

75

80

Thus, hard though he sweeps on, you might stay him beside the fastrunning
ships, even though the very Olympian wakes him to battle.”
Poseidon who circles the earth and shakes it spoke, and striking
both of them with his staff filled them with powerful valor,
and he made their limbs light, and their feet, and their hands above
them,
and burst into winged flight himself, like a hawk with quick wings
who from the huge height of an impassable rock lifting
leans to flight to pursue some other bird over the wide land;
so Poseidon shaker of the earth broke away from the Aiantes.
And of the two swift Aias son of Oïleus was first
to know him, and spoke therewith to Aias the son of Telamon;
“Aias, since some one of the gods, whose hold is Olympos,
has likened himself to the seer, and told us to fight by our vessels,
this is not Kalchas, the bird interpreter of the gods, for I knew
easily as he went away the form of his feet, the legs’ form
from behind him. Gods, though gods, are conspicuous. Therefore
as for me, the spirit inside my inward breast drives me
all the harder to carry on the war and the fighting,
and my feet underneath me are eager and my hands above them.”
Aias the son of Telamon spoke to him in answer:
“So for me also now the invincible hands on my spearshaft
are furious, my strength is rising, and both feet beneath me
are sweeping me onward, so that I long even for single combat
with Hektor, Priam’s son, the forever avid of battle.”

Now as these two were saying such things to each other, joyful
in the delight of battle the god had put into their spirits,
meanwhile the earth-encircler stirred up the Achaians behind them
who were cooling the heat of the inward heart back beside their vessels,
85 for their very limbs were broken with weariness of hard work, and also
discouragement of the heart came over them, as they watched
the Trojans, and how in a mass they had overswarmed the great wall.

As they saw them the tears dripped from their eyes; they did not
think they could win clear of the evil, but the earth-shaker
90 lightly turning their battalions to strength drove them onward.
He came first in encouragement to Teukros and Leïtos,
with the fighting Peneleos, and Deïpyros and Thoas,
to Meriones and Antilochos, both urgent for battle.
Calling out to these in winged words he rallied them onward:
95 “Shame, you Argives, young fighting men, since I for my part
have confidence that by fighting you can save our ships from
destruction;
but if you yourselves are to go slack from the sorrowful fighting
now is seen your day to be beaten down by the Trojans.
Oh for shame! Here is a great strange thing I see with my own eyes,
100 a terrible thing, and one that I thought never could happen,
that the Trojans could come against our ships, they who in time past
were like fugitive deer before us, who in the forests
are spoil for scavengers and wolves and leopards, who scatter
in absolute cowardice, there is no war spirit within them.
105 So before now the Trojans were unwilling to stand up
against the strength and hands of the Achaians, even for a little,
but now far from their city they fight by the hollow vessels
through the weakness of our leader, and the hanging back of our people
who have made their quarrel with him, and will not stand in defense
110 of the fast-running ships. Instead of this they are killed against them.
Yet even though it be utterly true that the son of Atreus
the hero wide-powerful Agamemnon is guilty
because he did dishonor to Peleus’ son, the swift-footed,
still there is no way for us now to hang back from the fighting.
115 No, sooner let us heal it, for the hearts of great men can be healed.
But you can no longer in honor give way from your fighting valor
being all the best men along the host. Even I, for my part,
would not quarrel with any man who hung back from the fighting
because he was a weak thing, but with you my heart must be angry.
120 O friends, soon you will bring to pass some still greater evil
with this hanging back. Let every one of you plant in his heart’s depth
discipline and shamefastness. A big battle rises against you.

For Hektor of the great war cry is fighting beside our vessels
in his power, and has broken our gates and the long door-bar.”

125

So urging them on the earth-encircler stirred up the Achaians,
and their battalions formed in strength about the two Aiantes,
battalions the war god could not find fault with, coming among them,
nor Athene lady of storming armies, since there the bravest
formed apart and stood against the Trojans and brilliant Hektor
130 locking spear by spear, shield against shield at the base, so buckler
leaned on buckler, helmet on helmet, man against man,
and the horse-hair crests along the horns of their shining helmets
touched as they bent their heads, so dense were they formed on each
other,
and the spears shaken from their daring hands made a jagged battle
line.
135 Their thoughts were driving straight ahead in the fury of fighting.
The Trojans came down on them in a pack, and Hektor led them
raging straight forward, like a great rolling stone from a rock face
that a river swollen with winter rain has wrenched from its socket
and with immense washing broken the hold of the unwilling rock face;
140 the springing boulder flies on, and the forest thunders beneath it;
and the stone runs unwavering on a strong course, till it reaches
the flat land, then rolls no longer for all its onrush;
so Hektor for a while threatened lightly to break through
the shelters and ships of the Achaians and reach the water
145 cutting his way. But when he collided with the dense battalions
he was stopped, hard, beaten in on himself. The sons of the Achaians
against him stabbing at him with swords and leaf-headed spears
thrust him away from them so that he gave ground backward,
staggering.
He lifted his voice and called in a piercing cry to the Trojans:
150 “Trojans, Lykians, Dardanians who fight at close quarters,
stand with me. The Achaians will not hold me back for a long time
for all they are building themselves into a bastion against me.

No, I think they will give back under my spear, if truly
I am driven by the greatest of gods, the thunderous lord of Hera.”
155
So he spoke, and stirred the spirit and strength in each man.
Among them Deïphobos in high purpose had come striding,
Priam’s son, who held the perfect circle of his shield before him,
moving lightly on his feet as he walked in the shield’s protection.
Meriones aimed at him with the shining spear, and threw it
160 nor missed his mark, but struck the’ shield on its perfect circle
of bull’s hide, but the spear did not get through, but sooner
the long shaft was broken behind the head. Deïphobos
held the bull’s-hide shield away from him, his heart frightened
by the spear of wise Meriones, but that hero drew back
165 into the host of his own companions, deeply angered
for two things, the broken spear and the loss of his battle,
and went away back to the shelters and ships of the Achaians
to bring back a long spear that was left behind in his shelter.
But the rest fought on with clamor incessant rising about them.
170 Teukros, son of Telamon, was the first to kill his man, Imbrios
the spearfighter, son of Mentor of the many horses, one who
before the coming of the sons of the Achaians lived in Pedaios
and had married a bastard daughter of Priam, Medesikaste.
But when the oarswept ships of the Danaäns came, he went back
175 to Ilion, and was a great man among the Trojans, and lived
at Priam’s side, who honored him as he did his own children.
Now the son of Telamon with the long spear stabbed him under
the ear, and wrenched the spear out again, and he dropped like an ash
tree
which, on the crest of a mountain glittering far about, cut down
180 with the bronze axe scatters on the ground its delicate leafage;
so he dropped, and the armor elaborate with bronze clashed
about him, and Teukros ran up, eager to strip the armor.
As he came on Hektor threw at him with the shining javelin,
but Teukros with his eyes straight on him avoided the bronze spear
185 by a little, and Hektor struck Amphimachos, son of Aktorian
Kteatos, with a spear in his chest as he swept into battle.

He fell, thunderously, and his armor clattered upon him.
Then Hektor charged in to tear the helm of great-hearted Amphimachos
from his head where it fitted close on the brows, but Aias
190 thrust with the shining spear at Hektor as he came onward;
he could not manage to reach the skin, since this was all shrouded
in the ghastly bronze, but drove at the shield’s mass in the middle
and beat him back in great strength so that Hektor gave ground
backward
from both corpses. These the Achaians dragged out of the fighting.
195 Then Stichios and brilliant Menestheus, lords of the Athenians,
carried Amphimachos back among the Achaian people.
But the two Aiantes in the fury of their fierce war strength,
as two lions catch up a goat from the guard of rip-fanged
hounds, and carry it into the density of the underbrush,
200 holding it high from the ground in the crook of their jaws, so the lordly
two Aiantes lifted Imbrios high and stripped him
of his armor, and the son of Oïleus, in anger
for Amphimachos, hewed away his head from the soft neck
and threw it spinning like a ball through the throng of fighters
205 until it came to rest in the dust at the feet of Hektor.
Then Poseidon was angered about the heart at his grandson’s
slaying in the bitter hostility, so the god went forth
on his way among the shelters and ships of the Achaians
and stirred the Danaäns, and worked disaster against the Trojans.
210 Idomeneus the spear-famed encountered him, on his way
from a companion, who had just before come back from the fighting
wounded in the hollow behind the knee by the sharp bronze.
This man his companions carried away. Idomeneus had given
the healers instructions and gone on to his shelter, still burning
215 to face the battle, and now the strong earth-shaker spoke to him.
Poseidon likened his voice to Thoas, son of Andraimon,
lord of the Aitolians over all Pleuron, and headlong
Kalydon, who was honored in his countryside as a god is:
“Idomeneus, lord of the Kretans’ councils, where are those threats you
gave

220 now, that the sons of the Achaians uttered against the Trojans?”
Then Idomeneus lord of the Kretans answered him in turn:
“Thoas, no man is responsible for this, so far as
my thought goes, since all of us understand how to wage war.
It is not that heartless fear holds anyone, that a man yielding
225 to dread emerges out of the evil fighting, but rather
this way must be pleasurable to Kronos’ son in his great strength,
that the Achaians must die here forgotten, and far from Argos.
Since you, Thoas, have been before this a man stubborn in battle
and stirred up another whenever you saw one hang back, so now
230 also do not give up, and urge on each man as you find him.”
Then in answer spoke the shaker of the earth, Poseidon:
“Idomeneus, may that man who this day willfully hangs back
from the fighting never win home again out of Troy land,
but stay here and be made dogs’ delight for their feasting. Come then,
235 take up your armor and go with me. We must speed this action
together, since we, being two, might bring some advantage.
The warcraft even of sad fighters combined turns courage,
and you and I would have skill to fight even against good men.”
So he spoke and strode on, a god, through the mortals’ struggle.
240 Idomeneus, when he came back to his strong-built shelter,
drew his splendid armor over his body, and caught up two spears,
and went on his way, as a thunderbolt, which the son of Kronos
catching up in his hand shakes from the shining edge of Olympos,
flashes as a portent to men and the bright glints shine from it.
245 Such was the glitter of bronze that girt his chest in his running.
Close to his shelter there encountered him his strong henchman,
Meriones, who was on his way to pick up a bronze spear
and bring it back. Idomeneus in his strength spoke to him:
“Meriones, son of Molos, swift-footed, dearest beloved
250 companion, why have you come back and left the battle and fighting?
Have you been hit somewhere? Does pain of a spear’s head afflict you?
Have you come back with someone’s message for me? For my part
my desire is to fight, not sit away in the shelters.”
Meriones, a thoughtful man, spoke to him in answer:

255 “Idomeneus, lord of the counsels of the bronze-armored Kretans,
I am on my way to bring back a spear, if you have any
left in your shelter. I broke just now the one I was carrying
with a throw made against the shield of haughty Deïphobos.
Then Idomeneus lord of the Kretans answered him in turn:
260 “You will find one spear, and twenty spears, if you want them,
standing against the shining inward wall in my shelter,
Trojan spears I win from men that I kill, for my way
is not to fight my battles standing far away from my enemies.
Thereby I have spears there, and shields massive in the middle,
265 and helms and corselets are there in all the pride of their shining.”
Meriones, a thoughtful man, spoke to him in answer:
“For me also, beside my shelter and beside my black ship,
there are many spoils of the Trojans, but not near for me to get them.
For I tell you, neither am I one who has forgotten his war strength
270 but among the foremost, along the fighting where men win glory,
I take my stand, whenever the quarrel of battle arises.
Let my fighting be forgotten by some other bronze-armored
Achaian. You are the very one I think must know of it.”
Then Idomeneus lord of the Kretans answered him in turn:
275 “I know your valor and what you are. Why need you speak of it?
If now beside the ships all the best of us were to assemble
for a hidden position, and there man’s courage is best decided,
where the man who is a coward and the brave man show themselves
clearly:
the skin of the coward changes color one way and another,
280 and the heart inside him has no control to make him sit steady,
but he shifts his weight from one foot to another, then settles firmly
on both feet, and the heart inside his chest pounds violent
as he thinks of the death spirits, and his teeth chatter together:
but the brave man’s skin will not change color, nor is he too much
285 frightened, once he has taken his place in the hidden position,
but his prayer is to close as soon as may be in bitter division:
and there no man could make light of your battle strength or your
hand’s work.

Even were you to be wounded in your work with spearcast or spearstroke,
the weapon would not strike behind your neck, nor in your back,
290 but would be driven straight against the chest or the belly
as you made your way onward through the meeting of champions.
But come, let us no longer stand here talking of these things
like children, for fear some man may arrogantly scold us.
Go to my shelter and choose for yourself a heavy spear.”

295

So he spoke; Meriones, a match for the rapid war god,
went into the shelter rapidly, and took up a bronze spear,
and with his mind deeply set on battle followed Idomeneus.
As manslaughtering Ares is when he strides into battle
and Terror goes on beside him, his beloved son, the powerful
300 and dauntless, who frightens even the patient-hearted warrior:
these two come out of Thrace to encounter in arms the Ephyroi
or the great-hearted Phlegyes, but the two will not listen to prayers
from both sides, but give the glory to one side or the other:
such were Meriones and Idomeneus, leaders of armies,
305 as they went on into the fighting helmed in the bright bronze.
First of the two, Meriones, spoke his word to Idomeneus:
“Deukalides, where are you minded to enter the battle?
Would it be on the right of the whole array, or in the center,
or to the left? Since I think that nowhere else in the fighting
310 are the flowing-haired Achaians overmatched so badly.”
Idomeneus lord of the Kretans answered him in turn:
“There are others beside us to defend the ships in the center,
the two Aiantes, and Teukros, best of all the Achaians
in archery, and a good man in the close of standing combat.
315 They can give Hektor, Priam’s son, enough hard hitting,
even though he is very strong, and sweeps hard into battle.
Furious though he is for fighting, it will be very steep work
for him to win through their irresistible hands and their war strength
and fire the ships, unless the son of Kronos in person

320 should hurl the blazing firebrand into our fast-running vessels.
Nor would huge Telamonian Aias give way to any man,
one who was mortal and ate bread, the yield of Demeter,
one who could be broken by the bronze and great stones flung at him.
He would not make way for Achilleus who breaks men in battle,
325 in close combat. For speed of feet none can strive with Achilleus.
Hold, as you say, for the left of the army, and thus soonest
shall we see whether we win glory or give it to others.”
He spoke, and Meriones, a match for the running war god,
led the way, till they came to the place in the army he spoke for.

330

These, as they saw Idomeneus like a flame in his valor
himself and his henchman with him in their elaborate war gear,
they called out across the battle and gathered about him,
and an indiscriminate fight rose up by the sterns of the vessels.
And as when under the screaming winds the whirlstorms bluster
335 on that day when the dust lies deepest along the pathways
and the winds in the confusion of dust uplift a great cloud,
such was their indiscriminate battle, and their hearts were furious
to slaughter each other with the sharp bronze through the press of the
fighting.
The battle where men perish shuddered now with the long
340 man-tearing spears they held in their hands, their eyes were blinded
in the dazzle of the bronze light from the glittering helmets,
from the burnished corselets and the shining shields as men came on
in confusion. That man would have to be very bold-hearted
who could be cheerful and not stricken looking on that struggle.
345 Two powerful sons of Kronos, hearts divided against each other,
were wreaking bitter agonies on the fighting warriors,
since Zeus willed the victory for the Trojans and Hektor,
glorifying swift-footed Achilleus, yet not utterly
did he wish the Achaian people to be destroyed before Ilion,
350 but only was giving glory to Thetis and her strong-spirited

son, while Poseidon emerging unseen from the gray salt water
went among the Argives and stirred them, since he was angered
that they were beaten by the Trojans and blamed Zeus for it bitterly.
Indeed, the two were of one generation and a single father,
355 but Zeus was the elder born and knew more. Therefore Poseidon
shrank from openly defending them, but secretly
in a man’s likeness was forever stirring them up through the army.
So these two had looped over both sides a crossing
cable of strong discord and the closing of battle, not to be
360 slipped, not to be broken, which unstrung the knees of many.
There Idomeneus, graying though he was, called on the Danaäns
and charged in upon the Trojans and drove panic among them
for he killed Othryoneus, a man who had lived in Kabesos,
who was newly come in the wake of the rumor of war, and had asked
365 Priam for the hand of the loveliest of his daughters,
Kassandra, without bride price, but had promised a great work for her,
to drive back the unwilling sons of the Achaians from Troy land,
and aged Priam had bent his head in assent, and promised
to give her, so Othryoneus fought in the faith of his promises.
370 Idomeneus aimed at him with the shining spear, and threw it,
and hit him as he came onward with high stride, and the corselet
of bronze he wore could not hold, the spear fixed in the middle belly.
He fell, thunderously, and Idomeneus vaunting cried out:
“Othryoneus, I congratulate you beyond all others
375 if it is here that you will bring to pass what you promised
to Dardanian Priam, who in turn promised you his daughter.
See now, we also would make you a promise, and we would fulfill it;
we would give you the loveliest of Atreides’ daughters,
and bring her here from Argos to be your wife, if you joined us
380 and helped us storm the strong-founded city of Ilion.
Come then with me, so we can meet by our seafaring vessels
about a marriage; we here are not bad matchmakers for you.”
The hero Idomeneus spoke and dragged him through the strong
encounter
caught by the foot, but now Asios came to stand by him

385 dismounted, ahead of his horses whom his henchman held ever behind
him
so that they breathed on his shoulders. He was striving in all his fury
to strike Idomeneus, but he, too quick with a spearcast,
struck him in the gorge underneath the chin, and drove the bronze clean
through.
He fell, as when an oak goes down or a white poplar
390 or like a towering pine tree which in the mountains the carpenters
have hewn down with their whetted axes to make a ship timber.
So he lay there felled in front of his horses and chariot,
roaring, and clawed with his hands at the bloody dust. Meanwhile
the charioteer who was close behind him was stricken in the wits
395 and shrinking from the hands of the enemy did not have daring
to turn the horses about, but Antilochos stubborn in battle
pinned him through the middle with a spearstroke, and the corselet
of bronze he wore could not hold, the spear fixed in the middle belly,
so that he tumbled, gasping, out of the strong-wrought chariot.
400 But for the horses, Antilochos, son of great-hearted Nestor,
drove them away from the Trojans among the strong-greaved Achaians.
Deïphobos in sorrow for Asios now came close
in on Idomeneus, and with the bright spear made a cast at him,
but Idomeneus with his eyes straight on him avoided the bronze spear
405 since also he was hidden beneath his shield’s perfect circle, that shield
he carried, hooped in circles of glaring bronze, and the skins
of oxen, fitted with double cross-stays. He was all gathered
together under this, and the brazen spear shot over him
and the shield gave out a hollow clash as the spear glanced from it.
410 Yet Deïphobos made no utterly vain cast from his strong hand,
but struck Hypsenor, son of Hippasos, shepherd of the people,
in the liver under the midriff, and at once took the strength from his
knees.
And Deïphobos vaunted terribly over him, calling in a great voice:
“Asios lies not now all unavenged. I think rather
415 as he goes down to Hades of the Gates, the strong one,
he will be cheerful at heart, since I have sent him an escort.”

He spoke, and sorrow came over the Argives at his vaunting,
and beyond others stirred the spirit in wise Antilochos,
yet sorrowful though he was he did not forget his companion
420 but running stood and bestrode him and covered him under the great
shield.
Thereon Mekisteus, son of Echios, and brilliant Alastor,
two staunch companions, stooping beneath it, caught up Hypsenor,
and carried him, groaning heavily, to the hollow vessels.
Idomeneus did not slacken his great fury, but always
425 was straining to shroud some one of the Trojans in dark night
or go down crashing himself as he fought the bane from the Achaians.
There was a man, loved son of illustrious Aisyetes,
the hero Alkaïthoös, who was son-in-law of Anchises,
and had married the eldest of his daughters, Hippodameia,
430 dear to the hearts of her father and the lady her mother
in the great house, since she surpassed all the girls of her own age
for beauty and accomplishments and wit; for which reason
the man married her who was the best in the wide Troad.
But now Poseidon beat him down at the hands of Idomeneus,
435 for he bewitched his shining eyes, made moveless his bright limbs,
so that he could not run backward, neither evade him,
but stood like a statue or a tree with leaves towering
motionless, while fighting Idomeneus stabbed at the middle
of his chest with the spear, and broke the bronze armor about him
440 which in time before had guarded his body from destruction.
He cried out then, a great cry, broken, the spear in him,
and fell, thunderously, and the spear in his heart was stuck fast
but the heart was panting still and beating to shake the butt end
of the spear. Then and there Ares the huge took his life away from him.
445 Idomeneus vaunted terribly over him, calling in a great voice:
“Deïphobos, are we then to call this a worthy bargain,
three men killed for one? It was you yourself were so boastful.
Strange man. Do you rather come yourself and stand up against me
so you can see what I am like, Zeus’ seed, come here to face you.
450 Since Zeus first got by Krete Minos, who cared for his people,

and to Minos in turn was born a blameless son, Deukalion,
and Deukalion sired me to be lord over many people
in wide Krete, and now my ships have brought me to this place
to be an evil for you and your father and the rest of the Trojans.”
455 So he spoke, and the heart in Deïphobos was divided,
pondering whether to draw back and find some other high-hearted
Trojan to be his companion, or whether to attempt him singly.
And in the division of his heart this way seemed best to him,
to go for Aineias. He found him at the uttermost edge of the battle
460 standing, since he was forever angry with brilliant Priam
because great as he was he did him no honor among his people.
Deïphobos came and stood close to him and addressed him in winged
words:
“Aineias, lord of the Trojans’ counsels, now there is need of you
to stand by your brother-in-law, if this bond of kinship touches you.
465 Come then, stand by Alkaïthoös, who was your sister’s husband
and in time past nursed you in his house when you were still little.
But now Idomeneus the spear-famed has killed him in battle.”
So he spoke, and stirred the anger in the breast of Aineias.
He went against Idomeneus, strongly eager for battle,
470 yet no fear gripped Idomeneus as if he were a stripling,
but he stood his ground like a mountain wild boar who in the
confidence
of his strength stands up to a great rabble of men advancing
upon him in some deserted place, and bristles his back up,
and both his eyes are shining with fire; he grinds his teeth
475 in his fury to fight off the dogs and the men. So
spear-famed Idomeneus held his ground, and would not give way
to Aineias coming against him, but bellowed to his companions,
looking to Askalaphos, and Aphareus, and Deïpyros,
at Meriones and Antilochos, both urgent for battle,
480 and stirring all these forward called out to them in winged words:
“This way, friends, stand by me, I am alone, and terribly
I fear the attack of swift-footed Aineias advancing upon me,
powerful as he is for the slaying of men in battle.

Likewise the flower of youth is his, where man’s strength is highest,
485 since were we two of the same age, and in this same spirit,
soon he would win me in a great battle, or I would win him.”
So he spoke, and all these, a single spirit within them,
came and stood in their numbers and sloped their shields over his
shoulders,
and Aineias on the other side called to his own companions,
490 looking to Deïphobos, and Paris, and brilliant Agenor
who were lords of the Trojans along with him, and the people after
them
followed on, as when the sheep follow the lead-ram
as they leave the pasture to drink, and make proud the heart of the
shepherd,
and thus also the heart of Aineias was gladdened within him
495 as he saw the swarm of the host following his own leadership.
These then drove on in close combat about Alkaïthoös
with long spears, and the bronze girding the chests of the fighters
clashed horribly to the spears they threw in the press at each other,
and two men, for warcraft pre-eminent beyond the others,
500 Aineias and Idomeneus, both men like the war god,
were straining with the pitiless bronze to tear at each other.
Aineias was first with a spear cast at Idomeneus,
but he, keeping his eyes straight on him, avoided the bronze spear,
so that the vibrant shaft of Aineias was driven groundward
505 since it had been thrown in a vain cast from his big hand.
But Idomeneus hit Oinomaos in the middle belly
and broke the hollow of the corselet, so that the entrails spurted
from the bronze, and he fell clawing the dust in his fingers.
Idomeneus wrenched out the far-shadowing spear from his body
510 but had no power to strip the rest of his splendid armor
away from his shoulders, since he was beaten back by their missiles,
and no longer in an outrush could his limbs stay steady beneath him
either to dash in after his spear, or to get clear again.
So in close-standing fight he beat off the pitiless death-day
515 as his feet no longer quick to run took him out of the fighting.

As he backed slowly Deïphobos made a cast with the shining
spear, since he held a fixed hatred forever against him,
but missed him yet once again and struck down with the spear the war
god’s
son Askalaphos, so that the powerful spear was driven
520 through his shoulder, and he dropping in the dust clawed the ground in
his fingers.
But Ares the huge and bellowing had yet heard nothing
of how his son had fallen there in the strong encounter
but he, sheltered under the golden clouds on utmost Olympos,
was sitting, held fast by command of Zeus, where the rest also
525 of the immortal gods were sitting still, in restraint from the battle.
But the men drove on in close combat about Askalaphos.
Deïphobos tore from Askalaphos the shining helmet;
but now Meriones, a match for the running war god,
plunging upon him stabbed his arm with the spear, and the hollow-eyed
530 helmet dropped from his hand and fell to the ground clashing.
Meriones in yet another swoop like a vulture
plucked out the heavy spear from the arm’s base at the shoulder,
then shrank into the host of his own companions. Polites,
Deïphobos’ brother, caught him about the waist with both arms
535 and got him out of the sorrowful fighting, and reached his fast-footed
horses, where they stood to the rear of the fighting and the battle
holding their charioteer and the elaborate chariot,
and these carried him, groaning heavily, back to the city
in pain, since the blood was running from his arm’s fresh wound.

540

But the rest fought on with clamor incessant rising about them.
There Aineias lunging at Aphareus, the son of Kaletor,
struck him with the sharp spear in the throat where it was turned toward
him.
His head bent over to one side, and his shield tumbled,
and the helm, and death breaking the spirit drifted about him.

545 Antilochos, watching Thoön as he turned about, dashed in on him
and slashed at him, and shore away the entire vein
which runs all the way up the back till it reaches the neck. This
he shore away entire, so he sprawled in the dust backward,
reaching out both hands to his beloved companions.
550 Antilochos rushed on him, trying to strip the armor
from his shoulders, but watchful, as the Trojans gathered about him
from all sides, and beat at the shining broad shield, but could not
get within it and tear with the pitiless bronze Antilochos’
tender flesh, for about him the earth-shaker Poseidon
555 guarded the son of Nestor even in the swarm of missiles.
Since he was not making his way back clear of the enemy,
but would turn to face them nor held motionless his spear, always
it was shaken or driven forward, the desire in his heart forever
to strike someone with a spearcast or drive at him in close combat.
560 Adamas, Asios’ son, was not blind to how he kept aiming
with his spear in the battle, and charging close stabbed with the sharp
bronze
at the shield’s middle, but Poseidon the dark-haired made void
his spear’s stroke, nor would let him win the life of Antilochos,
and half of the spear was stuck fast like a stake fire-hardened
565 in Antilochos’ shield, and the other half lay on the ground.
To avoid death he shrank into the host of his own companions;
but as he went back Meriones dogging him threw with the spear
and struck between navel and genitals where beyond all places
death in battle comes painfully to pitiful mortals.
570 There the spear stuck fast driven and he, writhing about it,
gasped as an ox does when among the mountains the herdsmen
have bound him strongly in twisted ropes and drag him unwilling.
So he, stricken, gasped for a little while, but not long,
until fighting Meriones came close and wrenched the spear out
575 from his body, and a mist of darkness closed over both eyes.
But Helenos closing struck Deïpyros on the temple
with a huge Thracian sword, and broke the helmet to pieces
so that it was knocked off and fell to the ground. An Achaian

picked it up where it rolled among the feet of the fighters;
580 but the darkness of night misted over the eyes of Deïpyros.
Then sorrow caught Atreus’ son Menelaos of the great war cry,
and he came on menacing and shaking his sharp spear at Helenos
the lord and fighter, who pulled against him the bow at the handgrip,
and both let fly at each other together, one with a sharp spear
585 in a javelin cast, and one with the arrow from the bowstring.
The son of Priam hit him then on the chest with an arrow
in the hollow of the corselet, but the bitter arrow sprang far back.
As along a great threshing floor from the broad blade
of a shovel the black-skinned beans and the chickpeas bounce high
590 under the whistling blast and the sweep of the winnowing fan, so
back from the corselet of glorious Menelaos the bitter
arrow rebounded far away, being driven hard back.
But Atreus’ son Menelaos of the great war cry struck him
in the hand where he held the polished bow, and the bronze spear
595 was driven clean on through the bow and the hand beyond it.
To avoid death he shrank into the host of his own companions,
dangling his wounded hand and dragging the ash spear with it.
But great-hearted Agenor drew from his hand the spear
and bound up his hand with a careful twist of wool fleece
600 in a sling the henchman held for the shepherd of the people.
Peisandros now came on straight against Menelaos
the glorious, but an evil destiny led him toward death’s end,
to be beaten down by you, Menelaos, in the stark encounter.
Now when these in their advance were close to each other
605 the son of Atreus missed with his throw, and the spear was turned past
him,
but Peisandros stabbed with the spear at the shield of glorious
Menelaos, but could not drive the bronze all the way through it
for the wide shield held against it and the spearshaft was broken
behind the head, yet he was light-hearted and hopeful of victory.
610 Drawing his sword with the silver nails, the son of Atreus
sprang at Peisandros, who underneath his shield’s cover gripped
his beautiful axe with strong bronze blade upon a long polished

axe-handle of olive wood. They made their strokes at the same time
and Peisandros chopped at the horn of the helmet crested with horsehair
615 at the very peak. Menelaos struck him as he came onward
in the forehead over the base of the nose, and smashed the bones, so
that
both eyes dropped, bloody, and lay in the dust at his feet before him.
He fell, curling, and Menelaos, setting his heel on
his chest, stripped off his armor and spoke exulting over him:
620 “So, I think, shall you leave the ships of the fast-mounted Danaäns,
you haughty Trojans, never to be glutted with the grim war noises,
nor go short of all that other shame and defilement
wherewith you defiled me, wretched dogs, and your hearts knew no
fear
at all of the hard anger of Zeus loud-thundering,
625 the guest’s god, who some day will utterly sack your steep city.
You who in vanity went away taking with you my wedded
wife, and many possessions, when she had received you in kindness.
And now once more you rage among our seafaring vessels
to throw deadly fire on them and kill the fighting Achaians.
630 But you will be held somewhere, though you be so headlong for battle.
Father Zeus, they say your wisdom passes all others’,
of men and gods, and yet from you all this is accomplished
the way you give these outrageous people your grace, these Trojans
whose fighting strength is a thing of blind fury, nor can they ever
635 be glutted full of the close encounters of deadly warfare.
Since there is satiety in all things, in sleep, and lovemaking,
in the loveliness of singing and the innocent dance. In all these
things a man will strive sooner to win satisfaction
than in war; but in this the Trojans cannot be glutted.”
640 So Menelaos the blameless spoke, and stripping the bloody
armor away from his body gave it to his companions,
and turned back himself to merge in the ranks of the champions.
Now there sprang forth against him the son of King Pylaimenes,
Harpalion, who had followed his father into the fighting
645 at Troy, and did not come home again to the land of his fathers.

He from close up stabbed with his spear at the shield of Atreides
in the middle, but could not drive the bronze all the way through it.
To avoid death he shrank into the host of his own companions,
looking all about him, for fear somebody might wound him with the
bronze;
650 but as he went back Meriones let fly at him with a bronze-shod
arrow, and hit him beside the right buttock, so that the arrow
was driven on through under the bone to fix in the bladder.
There, sitting among the arms of his beloved companions,
he gasped out his life, then lay like a worm extended
655 along the ground, and his dark blood drenched the ground in its
running.
And the great-hearted Paphlagonians busied about him,
lifted him into a chariot and brought him to sacred Ilion
in sorrow, and his father, weeping tears, walked beside them,
and no man-price came his way for his son’s slaying.
660 But Paris was deeply angered at heart for this man’s slaying,
since he was his guest friend among many Paphlagonians,
and in anger for him he also let fly a bronze-shod arrow.
There was a man, Euchenor, son of the seer Polyidos,
a rich man and good, who lived in his house at Korinth,
665 who knew well that it was his death when he went on shipboard,
since many times the good old man Polyidos had told him
that he must die in his own house of a painful sickness
or go with the ships of the Achaians and be killed by the Trojans.
He therefore chose to avoid the troublesome price the Achaians
670 would ask, and the hateful sickness so his heart might not be afflicted.
Paris struck him by jaw and ear, and at once the life spirit
fled from his limbs, and the hateful darkness closed in about him.
So they fought on in the likeness of blazing fire. But meanwhile
Hektor beloved of Zeus had not heard of this, and knew nothing
675 of how to the left of the ships his people were being slaughtered
by the Argives, and glory for the Achaians might even have been
accomplished, such was Poseidon who circles the earth and shakes it
as he stirred on the Argives and fought for them and his own strength.

But Hektor held where first he had broken a way through the rampart
680 and the gates, and shattered the close ranks of the armored Danaäns,
where lay the ships of Aias and the ships of Protesilaos
hauled up along the beach of the gray sea; and above these
the wall they had built lay lowest, and there beyond other places
dangerous was the onslaught of the Trojans and of their horses.

685

There the Boiotians, and Ionians with their trailing tunics,
the Lokrians and the Phthians, with the shining Epeians
tried to hold him as he swept hard for the ships, but they could not
avail to beat brilliant flame-like Hektor back from them.
There also were the chosen Athenian men, and among them
690 Peteos’ son Menestheus was lord, and there followed with him
Pheidas and Stichios and strong Bias; but the Epeians
were led by Meges, Phyleus’ son, Amphion and Drakios,
and before the Phthians were Medon and battle-stubborn Podarkes.
Now of these one, Medon, was bastard son of Oïleus
695 the godlike, and brother of Aias, yet he was living away from
the land of his fathers, in Phylakē, since he had killed a man,
the brother of Eriopis, his stepmother and wife of Oïleus;
but the other was son of Iphiklos, the son of Phylakos.
And these in arms at the forefront of the great-hearted Phthians
700 fought beside the Boiotians in defense of their vessels.
But swift Aias the son of Oïleus would not at all now
take his stand apart from Telamonian Aias,
not even a little; but as two wine-colored oxen straining
with even force drag the compacted plough through the fallow land,
705 and for both of them at the base of the horns the dense sweat gushes;
only the width of the polished yoke keeps a space between them
as they toil down the furrow till the share cuts the edge of the
ploughland;
so these took their stand in battle, close to each other.
Now with the son of Telamon many people and brave ones
710 followed as companions, and took over the great shield from him

whenever the sweat and the weariness came over his body.
But no Lokrians went with the great-hearted son of Oïleus.
The heart was not in them to endure close-standing combat,
for they did not have the brazen helmets crested with horse-hair,
715 they did not have the strong-circled shields and the ash spears,
but rather these had followed to Ilion with all their confidence
in their bows and slings strong-twisted of wool; and with these
they shot their close volleys and broke the Trojan battalions.
So now these others fought in front in elaborate war gear
720 against the Trojans and Hektor the brazen-helmed, and the Lokrians
unseen volleyed from behind, so the Trojans remembered
nothing of the joy of battle, since the shafts struck them to confusion.
Now pitifully the Trojans might have gone back from the shelters
and the ships, to windy Ilion, had not Poulydamas
725 come and stood beside bold Hektor and spoken a word to him:
“Hektor, you are too intractable to listen to reason.
Because the god has granted you the actions of warfare
therefore you wish in counsel also to be wise beyond others.
But you cannot choose to have all gifts given to you together.
730 To one man the god has granted the actions of warfare,
to one to be a dancer, to another the lyre and the singing,
and in the breast of another Zeus of the wide brows establishes
wisdom, a lordly thing, and many take profit beside him
and he saves many, but the man’s own thought surpasses all others.
735 Now I will tell you the way that it seems best to my mind.
For you, everywhere the fighting burns in a circle around you,
but of the great-hearted Trojans since they crossed over the rampart
some are standing back in their war gear, others are fighting
fewer men against many, being scattered among the vessels.
740 Draw back now, and call to this place all of our bravest,
and then we might work out together our general counsel,
whether we can fall upon their benched ships, if the god might
be willing to give such power to us, or whether thereafter
we can win away from the ships unhurt; since I fear
745 the Achaians might wreak on us requital for yesterday;

since beside their ships lurks a man insatiate of fighting
and I think we can no longer utterly hold him from the fighting.”
So spoke Poulydamas, and this counsel of safety pleased Hektor,
and at once in all his armor he leapt to the ground from his chariot
750 and spoke to him and addressed him in winged words: “Poulydamas,
do you rather call back to their place all of our bravest.
I am going over there to meet the attack, and afterward
I will come back soon, when I have properly given my orders.”
So he spoke, and went on his way like a snowy mountain,
755 calling aloud, and swept through the Trojans and their companions.
But the rest of them rallied quickly around the son of Panthoös,
courtly Poulydamas, each as they heard the command of Hektor.
But Hektor ranged the ranks of the foremost fighters, searching
for Deïphobos, and the strength of Helenos the prince, and for Asios’
760 son Adamas, and Asios, Hyrtakos’ son, if he might
find them; but found them no longer utterly unwounded or living,
but some were lying along the sterns of Achaian vessels,
they who had lost their lives at the hands of the Argives, and others
were lying away inside the city with arrow or spear wounds.
765 But he found one man away to the left of the sorrowful battle,
brilliant Alexandros, the lord of lovely-haired Helen,
encouraging his companions and urging them on into battle.
Hektor came and stood near, and in words of shame he rebuked him:
“Evil Paris, beautiful, woman-crazy, cajoling:
770 where is Deïphobos gone, and the strength of the prince Helenos,
Adamas, Asios’ son, and Asios, son of Hyrtakos?
Where is Othryoneus? Now all steep Ilion is lost
utterly; now your own headlong destruction is certain.”
Then in turn Alexandros the godlike answered him:
775 “Hektor, since it is your pleasure to blame me when I am blameless,
it would be better some other time to withdraw from the fighting
than now. My mother bore me not utterly lacking in warcraft.
For since that time when by the ships you wakened the battle
of our companions, we have stayed here and fought the Danaäns
780 without end. And our companions are killed you ask for.

Only Deïphobos and the strength of the prince Helenos
have gone away, wounded each in the hand by strokes
of the long spears, but the son of Kronos fended death from them.
Now lead on, wherever your heart and spirit command you,
785 and we shall follow you eagerly; I think that we shall not
come short in warcraft, in so far as the strength stays with us.
But beyond his strength no man can fight, although he be eager.”
So the hero spoke, and persuaded the heart of his brother.
They went on, to where the clamor and fighting were greatest,
790 about Kebriones, and Poulydamas the blameless,
about Phalkes, and Orthaios, and godlike Polyphetes,
Palmys, with Askanios and Morys, sons of Hippotion,
who had come over in their turn from fertile Askania
on the dawn before, and now Zeus stirred them into the fighting.
795 They went on, as out of the racking winds the stormblast
that underneath the thunderstroke of Zeus father drives downward
and with gigantic clamor hits the sea, and the numerous
boiling waves along the length of the roaring water
bend and whiten to foam in ranks, one upon another;
800 so the Trojans closing in ranks, some leading and others
after them, in the glare of bronze armor followed their leaders.
And Hektor led them, Priam’s son, a man like the murderous
war god, and held the perfect circle of his shield before him
fenced deep in skins, with a great fold of bronze beaten upon it,
805 and about his temples was shaken as he went the glittering helmet.
He would step forward, to probe the Achaian battalions at all points,
if they might give way where he stalked on under his shield’s cover,
but could not so confuse the heart in the breasts of the Achaians.
Aias was first to take long strides forward and challenge him:
810 “Man, you are mad. Come closer. Why try this way to terrify
the Argives? It is not that we are so unskilled in fighting,
but by the wicked whiplash of Zeus we Achaians are beaten.
I suppose, then, your heart is hopeful utterly to break up
our ships? We too have prompt hands among us strong to defend them.
815 Rather, far before this your own strong-founded citadel
must go down under our hands, stormed and utterly taken.

And for yourself I say that the time is close, when in flight
you will pray to Zeus father and the other immortals
that your bright-maned horses might be swifter than hawks are
820 as they carry you through the stirred dust of the plain to your city.”
As he spoke so, an ominous bird winged by at his right hand,
a towering eagle, and the host of the Achaians, made brave
by the bird sign, shouted, but glorious Hektor answered him:
“Aias, you inarticulate ox, what is this you have spoken?
825 If I could only be called son to Zeus of the aegis
all the days of my life, and the lady Hera my mother,
and I be honored, as Apollo and Athene are honored,
so surely as this is a day that brings evil to the Argives,
all, and you will be killed with the rest of them, if you have daring
830 to stand up against my long spear, which will bite your delicate
body; yet then you will glut the dogs and birds of the Trojans
with fat and flesh, struck down beside the ships of the Achaians.”
So he spoke and led the way, and the rest of them followed him
with unearthly clamor, and all the people shouted behind him.
835 But the Argives on the other side cried out, and would not
forget their warcraft, but stood the attack of the bravest Trojans,
and the clamor from both was driven high to Zeus’ shining ether.

BOOK FOURTEEN

5

10

15

20

25

Now Nestor failed not to hear their outcry, though he was drinking
his wine, but spoke in winged words to the son of Asklepios:
“Take thought how these things shall be done, brilliant Machaon.
Beside the ships the cry of the strong young men grows greater.
Now, do you sit here and go on drinking the bright wine,
until Hekamede the lovely-haired makes ready a hot bath
for you, warming it, and washes away the filth of the bloodstains,
while I go out and make my way till I find some watchpoint.”
So he spoke, and took up the wrought shield of his son
Thrasymedes, breaker of horses. It lay in the shelter
all shining in bronze. Thrasymedes carried the shield of his father.
Then he caught up a powerful spear edged in sharp bronze
and stood outside the shelter, and at once saw a shameful action,
men driven to flight, and others harrying them in confusion,
the great-hearted Trojans, and the wall of the Achaians overthrown.
As when the open sea is deeply stirred to the ground-swell
but stays in one place and waits the rapid onset of tearing
gusts, nor rolls its surf onward in either direction
until from Zeus the wind is driven down to decide it;
so the aged man pondered, his mind caught between two courses,
whether to go among the throng of fast-mounted Danaäns
or in search of Atreus’ son Agamemnon, shepherd of the people.
And in the division of his heart this way seemed best to him,
to go after the son of Atreus, while the rest went on with the murderous
battle, and the weariless bronze about their bodies was clashing
as the men were stabbing with swords and leaf-headed spears.

30

35

40

45

50

Now there came toward Nestor the kings under God’s hand, they who
had been wounded by the bronze and came back along the ships,
Tydeus’
son, and Odysseus, and Atreus’ son Agamemnon. For there
were ships that had been hauled up far away from the fighting
along the beach of the gray sea. They had hauled up the first ones
on the plain, and by the sterns of these had built their defenses;
for, wide as it was, the seashore was not big enough to make room
for all the ships, and the people also were straitened; and therefore
they had hauled them up in depth, and filled up the long edge
of the whole sea-coast, all that the two capes compassed between them.
These lords walked in a group, each leaning on his spear, to look at
the clamorous battle, and for each the heart inside his body
was sorrowful; and Nestor the aged man who now met them
made still more cast down the spirit inside the Achaians.
Now powerful Agamemnon spoke aloud and addressed him:
“Nestor, son of Neleus, great glory of the Achaians,
why have you left the fighting where men die, and come back here?
I am afraid huge Hektor may accomplish that word against me
that he spoke, threatening, among the Trojans assembled,
that he would not make his way back from the ships toward Ilion
until he had set the ships on fire, and killed the men in them.
So he spoke then; now all these things are being accomplished.
Oh, shame, for I think that all the other strong-greaved Achaians
are storing anger against me in their hearts, as Achilleus
did, and no longer will fight for me by the grounded vessels.”

Then answered him in turn the Gerenian horseman Nestor:
“All these things have been brought to fulfillment, nor in any other
way could even Zeus who thunders on high accomplish it.
55 For the wall has gone down in which we put our trust, that it
would be a protection for our ships and us, and could not be broken,
and our men beside the fast ships are fighting incessantly
without end, nor could you tell anymore, though you looked hard,
from which side the Achaians are broken into confusion,
60 so indiscriminately are they killed, and their crying goes skyward.

65

70

75

80

We then must take thought together how these things shall be done
if wit can do anything for us now. I think that we must not
enter the fight; a man cannot fight on when he is wounded.”
Then in turn the lord of men Agamemnon spoke to him:
“Nestor, since now they are fighting beside the grounded vessels
and the wall we built has done us no good, nor the ditch either
where the Danaäns endured so much, and their hearts were hopeful
it would be a protection to their ships and them, and could not be
broken,
then such is the way it must be pleasing to Zeus, who is too strong,
that the Achaians must die here forgotten and far from Argos.
For I knew it, when with full heart he defended the Danaäns,
and I know it now, when he glorifies these people as if they
were blessed gods, and has hobbled our warcraft and our hands’
strength.
Come then, do as I say, let us all be won over; let us
take all those ships that are beached near the sea in the first line
and haul them down, and row them out on the shining water,
and moor them at anchor stones out on the deep water, until
the immortal Night comes down, if the Trojans will give over fighting
for Night’s sake; then we might haul down all the rest of our vessels.
There is no shame in running, even by night, from disaster.
The man does better who runs from disaster than he who is caught by
it.”

Then looking darkly at him spoke resourceful Odysseus:
“Son of Atreus, what sort of word escaped your teeth’s barrier?
Ruinous! I wish you directed some other unworthy
85 army, and were not lord over us, over us to whom Zeus
has appointed the accomplishing of wars, from our youth
even into our old age until we are dead, each of us.
Are you really thus eager to abandon the wide-wayed city
of the Trojans, over which we have taken so many sorrows?
90 Do not say it; for fear some other Achaian might hear this
word, which could never at all get past the lips of any man
who understood inside his heart how to speak soundly,

who was a sceptered king, and all the people obeyed him
in numbers like those of the Argives, whose lord you are.
95 Now I utterly despise your heart for the thing you have spoken;
you who in the very closing of clamorous battle
tell us to haul our strong-benched ships to the sea, so that even
more glory may befall the Trojans, who beat us already,
and headlong destruction swing our way, since the Achaians
100 will not hold their battle as the ships are being hauled seaward,
but will look about, and let go the exultation of fighting.
There, O leader of the people, your plan will be ruin.”
Then in turn the lord of men Agamemnon answered him:
“Odysseus, you have hit me somewhere deep in my feelings
105 with this hard word. But I am not telling the sons of the Achaians
against their will to drag their benched ships down to the water.
Now let someone speak who has better counsel than this was;
young man or old; and what he says will be to my liking.”
Now among them spoke Diomedes of the great war cry:
110 “That man is here, we shall not look far for him, if you are willing
to listen, and not be each astonished in anger against me
because by birth I am the youngest among you. I also
can boast that my generation is of an excellent father,
Tydeus, whom now the heaped earth covers over in Thebe.
115 For there were three blameless sons who were born to Portheus,
and their home was in Pleuron and headlong Kalydon. Agrios
was first, then Melas, and the third was Oineus the horseman,
the father of my father, and in valor beyond the others.
But Oineus stayed in the land, while my father was driven and settled
120 in Argos. Such was the will of Zeus and the other immortals.
He married one of the daughters of Adrestos, and established
a house rich in substance, and plenty of wheat-grown acres
were his, with many orchards of fruit trees circled about him,
and many herds were his. He surpassed all other Achaians
125 with the spear. If all this is true, you must have heard of it.
Therefore you could not, saying that I was base and unwarlike
by birth, dishonor any word that I speak, if I speak well.

Let us go back to the fighting wounded as we are. We have to.
Once there, we must hold ourselves out of the onfall, clear of
130 missiles, so that none will add to the wound he has got already,
but we shall be there to drive them on, since even before this
they have favored their anger, and stood far off, and will not fight for
us.”
So he spoke, and they listened well to him, and obeyed him,
and went on their way. And the lord of men, Agamemnon, led them.
135 Neither did the glorious shaker of the earth keep blind watch,
but came among them now in the likeness of an old man,
and took hold of Agamemnon, Atreus’ son, by the right hand,
and spoke to him and addressed him in winged words: “Son of Atreus,
I think that now that baleful heart in the breast of Achilleus
140 must be happy as he stares at the slaughter of the Achaians
and their defeat. There is no heart in him, not even a little.
Even so may the god strike him down, let him go to destruction.
But with you the blessed gods are not utterly angry.
There will still be a time when the lords of Troy and their counselors
145 shall send dust wide on the plain, and you yourself shall look on them
as they take flight for their city away from the ships and the shelters.”
So he spoke, and swept on over the plain, with a huge cry
like the yell nine thousand men send up, or ten thousand
in battle, as they close in the hateful strife of the war god.
150 So huge was the cry the powerful earth-shaker let go
from his lungs, and in the heart of every Achaian implanted
great strength, to carry the battle on, and fight without flinching.
Now Hera, she of the golden throne, standing on Olympos’
horn, looked out with her eyes, and saw at once how Poseidon,
155 who was her very brother and her lord’s brother, was bustling
about the battle where men win glory, and her heart was happy.
Then she saw Zeus, sitting along the loftiest summit
on Ida of the springs, and in her eyes he was hateful.
And now the lady ox-eyed Hera was divided in purpose
160 as to how she could beguile the brain in Zeus of the aegis.
And to her mind this thing appeared to be the best counsel,

to array herself in loveliness, and go down to Ida,
and perhaps he might be taken with desire to lie in love with her
next her skin, and she might be able to drift an innocent
165 warm sleep across his eyelids, and seal his crafty perceptions.
She went into her chamber, which her beloved son Hephaistos
had built for her, and closed the leaves in the door-posts snugly
with a secret door-bar, and no other of the gods could open it.
There entering she drew shut the leaves of the shining door, then
170 first from her adorable body washed away all stains
with ambrosia, and next anointed herself with ambrosial
sweet olive oil, which stood there in its fragrance beside her,
and from which, stirred in the house of Zeus by the golden pavement,
a fragrance was shaken forever forth, on earth and in heaven.
175 When with this she had anointed her delicate body
and combed her hair, next with her hands she arranged the shining
and lovely and ambrosial curls along her immortal
head, and dressed in an ambrosial robe that Athene
had made her carefully, smooth, and with many figures upon it,
180 and pinned it across her breast with a golden brooch, and circled
her waist about with a zone that floated a hundred tassels,
and in the lobes of her carefully pierced ears she put rings
with triple drops in mulberry clusters, radiant with beauty,
and, lovely among goddesses, she veiled her head downward
185 with a sweet fresh veil that glimmered pale like the sunlight.
Underneath her shining feet she bound on the fair sandals.
Now, when she had clothed her body in all this loveliness,
she went out from the chamber, and called aside Aphrodite
to come away from the rest of the gods, and spoke a word to her:
190 “Would you do something for me, dear child, if I were to ask you?
Or would you refuse it? Are you forever angered against me
because I defend the Danaäns, while you help the Trojans?”
Then the daughter of Zeus, Aphrodite, answered her: “Hera,
honored goddess, daughter to mighty Kronos, speak forth
195 whatever is in your mind. My heart is urgent to do it
if I can, and if it is a thing that can be accomplished.”
Then, with false lying purpose the lady Hera answered her:

“Give me loveliness and desirability, graces
with which you overwhelm mortal men, and all the immortals.
200 Since I go now to the ends of the generous earth, on a visit
to Okeanos, whence the gods have risen, and Tethys our mother
who brought me up kindly in their own house, and cared for me
and took me from Rheia, at that time when Zeus of the wide brows
drove Kronos underneath the earth and the barren water.
205 I shall go to visit these, and resolve their division of discord,
since now for a long time they have stayed apart from each other
and from the bed of love, since rancor has entered their feelings.
Could I win over with persuasion the dear heart within them
and bring them back to their bed to be merged in love with each other
210 I shall be forever called honored by them, and beloved.”
Then in turn Aphrodite the laughing answered her:
“I cannot, and I must not deny this thing that you ask for,
you, who lie in the arms of Zeus, since he is our greatest.”
She spoke, and from her breasts unbound the elaborate, patternpierced
215 zone, and on it are figured all beguilements, and loveliness
is figured upon it, and passion of sex is there, and the whispered
endearment that steals the heart away even from the thoughtful.
She put this in Hera’s hands, and called her by name and spoke to her:
“Take this zone, and hide it away in the fold of your bosom.
220 It is elaborate, all things are figured therein. And I think
whatever is your heart’s desire shall not go unaccomplished.”
So she spoke, and the ox-eyed lady Hera smiled on her
and smiling hid the zone away in the fold of her bosom.
So Aphrodite went back into the house, Zeus’ daughter,
225 while Hera in a flash of speed left the horn of Olympos
and crossed over Piēria and Emathia the lovely
and overswept the snowy hills of the Thracian riders
and their uttermost pinnacles, nor touched the ground with her feet.
Then
from Athos she crossed over the heaving main sea
230 and came to Lemnos, and to the city of godlike Thoas.

There she encountered Sleep, the brother of Death. She clung
fast to his hand and spoke a word and called him by name: “Sleep,
lord over all mortal men and all gods, if ever
before now you listened to word of mine, so now also
235 do as I ask; and all my days I shall know gratitude.
Put to sleep the shining eyes of Zeus under his brows
as soon as I have lain beside him in love. I will give you
gifts; a lovely throne, imperishable forever,
of gold. My own son, he of the strong arms, Hephaistos,
240 shall make it with careful skill and make for your feet a footstool
on which you can rest your shining feet when you take your pleasure.”
Then Sleep the still and soft spoke to her in answer:
“Hera, honored goddess and daughter of mighty Kronos,
any other one of the gods, whose race is immortal,
245 I would lightly put to sleep, even the stream of that River
Okeanos, whence is risen the seed of all the immortals.
But I would not come too close to Zeus, the son of Kronos,
nor put him to sleep, unless when he himself were to tell me.
Before now, it was a favor to you that taught me wisdom,
250 on the day Herakles, the high-hearted son of Zeus, was sailing
from Ilion, when he had utterly sacked the city of the Trojans.
That time I laid to sleep the brain in Zeus of the aegis
and drifted upon him still and soft, but your mind was devising
evil, and you raised along the sea the blasts of the racking
255 winds, and on these swept him away to Kos, the strong-founded,
with all his friends lost, but Zeus awakened in anger
and beat the gods up and down his house, looking beyond all others
for me, and would have sunk me out of sight in the sea from the bright
sky
had not Night who has power over gods and men rescued me.
260 I reached her in my flight, and Zeus let be, though he was angry
in awe of doing anything to swift Night’s displeasure.
Now you ask me to do this other impossible thing for you.”
Then in turn the lady ox-eyed Hera answered him:
“Sleep, why do you ponder this in your heart, and hesitate?
265 Or do you think that Zeus of the wide brows, aiding the Trojans,

will be angry as he was angry for his son, Herakles?
Come now, do it, and I will give you one of the younger
Graces for you to marry, and she shall be called your lady;
Pasithea, since all your days you have loved her forever.”

270

So she spoke, and Sleep was pleased and spoke to her in answer:
“Come then! Swear it to me on Styx’ ineluctable water.
With one hand take hold of the prospering earth, with the other
take hold of the shining salt sea, so that all the undergods
who gather about Kronos may be witnesses to us.
275 Swear that you will give me one of the younger Graces,
Pasithea, the one whom all my days I have longed for.”
He spoke, nor failed to persuade the goddess Hera of the white arms,
and she swore as he commanded, and called by their names on all those
gods who live beneath the Pit, and who are called Titans.
280 Then when she had sworn this, and made her oath a complete thing,
the two went away from Lemnos, and the city of Imbros,
and mantled themselves in mist, and made their way very lightly
till they came to Ida with all her springs, the mother of wild beasts,
to Lekton, where first they left the water, and went on
285 over dry land, and with their feet the top of the forest was shaken.
There Sleep stayed, before the eyes of Zeus could light on him,
and went up aloft a towering pine tree, the one that grew tallest
at that time on Ida, and broke through the close air to the ether.
In this he sat, covered over and hidden by the pine branches,
290 in the likeness of a singing bird whom in the mountains
the immortal gods call chalkis, but men call him kymindis.
But Hera light-footed made her way to the peak of Gargaros
on towering Ida. And Zeus who gathers the clouds saw her,
and when he saw her desire was a mist about his close heart
295 as much as on that time they first went to bed together
and lay in love, and their dear parents knew nothing of it.
He stood before her and called her by name and spoke to her: “Hera,

what is your desire that you come down here from Olympos?
And your horses are not here, nor your chariot, which you would ride
in.”
300 Then with false lying purpose the lady Hera answered him:
“I am going to the ends of the generous earth, on a visit
to Okeanos, whence the gods have risen, and Tethys our mother,
who brought me up kindly in their own house, and cared for me.
I shall go to visit these, and resolve their division of discord,
305 since now for a long time they have stayed apart from each other
and from the bed of love, since rancor has entered their feelings.
In the foothills by Ida of the waters are standing
my horses, who will carry me over hard land and water.
Only now I have come down here from Olympos for your sake
310 so you will not be angry with me afterward, if I
have gone silently to the house of deep-running Okeanos.”
Then in turn Zeus who gathers the clouds answered her:
“Hera, there will be a time afterward when you can go there
as well. But now let us go to bed and turn to lovemaking.
315 For never before has love for any goddess or woman
so melted about the heart inside me, broken it to submission,
as now: not that time when I loved the wife of Ixion
who bore me Peirithoös, equal of the gods in counsel,
nor when I loved Akrisios’ daughter, sweet-stepping Danaë,
320 who bore Perseus to me, pre-eminent among all men,
nor when I loved the daughter of far-renowned Phoinix, Europa
who bore Minos to me, and Rhadamanthys the godlike;
not when I loved Semele, or Alkmene in Thebe,
when Alkmene bore me a son, Herakles the strong-hearted,
325 while Semele’s son was Dionysos, the pleasure of mortals;
not when I loved the queen Demeter of the lovely tresses,
not when it was glorious Leto, nor yourself, so much
as now I love you, and the sweet passion has taken hold of me.”
Then with false lying purpose the lady Hera answered him:
330 “Most honored son of Kronos, what sort of thing have you spoken?
If now your great desire is to lie in love together
here on the peaks of Ida, everything can be seen. Then

what would happen if some one of the gods everlasting
saw us sleeping, and went and told all the other immortals
335 of it? I would not simply rise out of bed and go back
again, into your house, and such a thing would be shameful.
No, if this is your heart’s desire, if this is your wish, then
there is my chamber, which my beloved son Hephaistos
has built for me, and closed the leaves in the door-posts snugly.
340 We can go back there and lie down, since bed is your pleasure.”
Then in turn Zeus who gathers the clouds answered her:
“Hera, do not fear that any mortal or any god
will see, so close shall be the golden cloud that I gather
about us. Not even Helios can look at us through it,
345 although beyond all others his light has the sharpest vision.”
So speaking, the son of Kronos caught his wife in his arms. There
underneath them the divine earth broke into young, fresh
grass, and into dewy clover, crocus and hyacinth
so thick and soft it held the hard ground deep away from them.
350 There they lay down together and drew about them a golden
wonderful cloud, and from it the glimmering dew descended.
So the father slept unshaken on the peak of Gargaron
with his wife in his arms, when sleep and passion had stilled him;
but gently Sleep went on the run to the ships of the Achaians
355 with a message to tell him who circles the earth and shakes it,
Poseidon, and stood close to him and addressed him in winged words:
“Poseidon, now with all your heart defend the Danaäns
and give them glory, though only for a little, while Zeus still
sleeps; since I have mantled a soft slumber about him
360 and Hera beguiled him into sleeping in love beside her.”

He spoke so, and went away among the famed races
of men, and stirred Poseidon even more to defend the Danaäns.
He sprang among their foremost and urged them on in a great voice:
“Argives, now once more must we give the best of it to Hektor,

365 Priam’s son, so he may take our ships and win glory from them?
Such is his thought and such is his prayer, because now Achilleus
in the anger of his heart stays still among the hollow ships.
But there will not be too much longing for him, if the others
of us can stir ourselves up to stand by each other.
370 Come; then, do as I say, let us all be won over; let us
take those shields which are best in all the army and biggest
and put them on, and cover our heads in the complete shining
of helmets, and take in our hands our spears that are longest
and go. I myself will lead the way, and I think that no longer
375 Hektor, Priam’s son, can stand up to us, for all his fury.
Let the man stubborn in battle who wears a small shield on his shoulder
give it to a worse man, and put on the shield that is bigger.”
So he spoke, and they listened hard to him, and obeyed him.
The kings in person marshaled these men, although they were
wounded,
380 Tydeus’ son, and Odysseus, and Atreus’ son Agamemnon.
They went among all, and made them exchange their armor of battle,
and the good fighter put on the good armor, and each gave the worse
gear
to the worse. Then when in the shining bronze they had shrouded their
bodies
they went forward, and Poseidon the shaker of the earth led them
385 holding in his heavy hand the stark sword with the thin edge
glittering, as glitters the thunderflash none may close with
by right in sorrowful division, but fear holds all men back.
On the other side glorious Hektor ordered the Trojans,
and now Poseidon of the dark hair and glorious Hektor
390 strained to its deadliest the division of battle, the one
bringing power to the Trojans, and the god to the Argives.
The breaking of the sea washed up to the ships and the shelters
of the Argives. The two sides closed together with a great war cry.
Not such is the roaring against dry land of the sea’s surf
395 as it rolls in from the open under the hard blast of the north wind;
not such is the bellowing of fire in its blazing

in the deep places of the hills when it rises inflaming the forest,
nor such again the crying voice of the wind in the deep-haired
oaks, when it roars highest in its fury against them,
400 not so loud as now the noise of Achaians and Trojans
in voice of terror rose as they drove against one another.
First glorious Hektor made a cast with his spear at Aias
since he had turned straight against him, nor missed with his throw
but struck, there where over his chest were crossed the two straps,
405 one for the sword with the silver nails, and one for the great shield.
These guarded the tenderness of his skin. And Hektor, in anger
because his weapon had been loosed from his hand in a vain cast,
to avoid death shrank into the host of his own companions.
But as he drew away huge Telamonian Aias
410 caught up a rock; there were many, holding-stones for the fast ships,
rolled among the feet of the fighters; he caught up one of these
and hit him in the chest next the throat over his shield rim,
and spun him around like a top with the stroke, so that he staggered
in a circle; as a great oak goes down root-torn under
415 Zeus father’s stroke, and a horrible smell of sulfur uprises
from it, and there is no courage left in a man who stands by
and looks on, for the thunderstroke of great Zeus is a hard thing;
so Hektor in all his strength dropped suddenly in the dust, let
fall the spear from his hand, and his shield was beaten upon him,
420 and the helm, and his armor elaborate with bronze clashed over him.
Screaming aloud the sons of the Achaians ran forward
in hope to drag him away, and threw their volleying javelins
against him, yet no man could stab or cast at the shepherd
of the people; sooner the Trojans’ bravest gathered about him,
425 Aineias, and Poulydamas, and brilliant Agenor,
Sarpedon, lord of the Lykians, and Glaukos the blameless;
and of the rest no man was heedless of him, but rather
sloped the strong circles of their shields over him, while his
companions
caught him in their arms out of the fighting and reached his fast-footed
430 horses, where they stood to the rear of the fighting and the battle

holding their charioteer and the elaborate chariot,
and these carried him, groaning heavily, back toward the city.
But when they came to the crossing place of the fair-running river,
of whirling Xanthos, whose father was Zeus the immortal,
435 they moved him from behind his horses to the ground, and splashed
water over him. He got his wind again, and his eyes cleared,
and he got up to lean on one knee and vomit a dark clot
of blood, then lay back on the ground again, while over both eyes
dark night misted. His strength was still broken by the stone’s stroke.
440 But the Argives, when they saw Hektor withdrawing from them,
remembered once again their warcraft and turned on the Trojans.
There far before them all swift Aias son of Oïleus
made an outrush, and stabbed with the sharp spear Satnios,
Enops’ son, whom the perfect naiad nymph had borne once
445 to Enops, as he tended his herds by Satnioeis river.
The spear-famed son of Oïleus, coming close to this man,
stabbed him in the flank so that he knocked him backward, and over
him
Trojans and Danaäns closed together in strong encounter.
Poulydamas of the shaken spear came up to stand by him,
450 Panthoös’ son, and struck in the right shoulder Prothoënor
son of Areïlykos, and the powerful spear was driven
through the shoulder, and he dropping in the dust clawed the ground in
his fingers.
Poulydamas vaunted terribly over him, calling in a great voice:
“I think this javelin leaping from the heavy hand of Panthoös’
455 high-hearted son was not thrown away in a vain cast. Rather
some Argive caught it in his skin. I think he has got it
for a stick to lean on as he trudges down into Death’s house.”
He spoke, and sorrow came over the Argives at his vaunting,
and beyond others he stirred the anger in wise Telamonian
460 Aias, for the man had fallen closest to him, and at once
he made a cast with the shining spear at returning Poulydamas.
But Poulydamas himself avoided the dark death

with a quick spring to one side, and Archelochos son of Antenor
caught the spear, since the immortal gods had doomed his destruction.
465 He hit him at the joining place of head and neck, at the last
vertebra, and cut through both of the tendons, so that
the man’s head and mouth and nose hit the ground far sooner
than did the front of his legs and knees as he fell. And Aias
spoke aloud in answer to unfaulted Poulydamas:
470 “Think over this, Poulydamas, and answer me truly.
Is not this man’s death against Prothoënor’s a worthwhile
exchange? I think he is no mean man, nor born of mean fathers,
but is some brother of Antenor, breaker of horses,
or his son; since he is close in blood by the look of him.”
475 He spoke, knowing well what he said, and sorrow fastened on the
Trojans.
There Akamas, bestriding his brother, stabbed the Boiotian
Promachos with the spear as he tried to drag off the body.
Akamas vaunted terribly over him, calling in a great voice:
“You Argives, arrow-fighters, insatiate of menace. I think
480 we shall not be the only ones to be given hard work
and sorrow, but you too must sometimes die, as this man did.
Think how Promachos sleeps among you, beaten down under
my spear, so that punishment for my brother may not go
long unpaid. Therefore a man prays he will leave behind him
485 one close to him in his halls to avenge his downfall in battle.”
He spoke, and sorrow came over the Argives at his vaunting,
and beyond others he stirred the anger in wise Peneleos.
He charged Akamas, who would not stand up against the onset
of lord Peneleos. He then stabbed with the spear Ilioneus
490 the son of Phorbas the rich in sheepflocks, whom beyond all men
of the Trojans Hermes loved, and gave him possessions.
Ilioneus was the only child his mother had borne him.
This man Peneleos caught underneath the brow, at the bases
of the eye, and pushed the eyeball out, and the spear went clean
through
495 the eye-socket and tendon of the neck, so that he went down
backward, reaching out both hands, but Peneleos drawing

his sharp sword hewed at the neck in the middle, and so dashed
downward
the head, with helm upon it, while still on the point of the big spear
the eyeball stuck. He, lifting it high like the head of a poppy,
500 displayed it to the Trojans and spoke vaunting over it:
“Trojans, tell haughty Ilioneus’ beloved father
and mother, from me, that they can weep for him in their halls, since
neither shall the wife of Promachos, Alegenor’s
son, take pride of delight in her dear lord’s coming, on that day
505 when we sons of the Achaians come home from Troy in our vessels.”
So he spoke, and the shivers came over the limbs of all of them,
and each man looked about him for a way to escape the sheer death.
Tell me now, you Muses who have your homes on Olympos,
who was first of the Achaians to win the bloody despoilment
510 of men, when the glorious shaker of the earth bent the way of the
battle?
First Telamonian Aias cut down Hyrtios, he who
was son to Gyrtios, and lord over the strong-hearted Mysians.
Antilochos slaughtered Phalkes and Mermeros. Morys
and Hippotion were killed by Meriones. Teukros cut down
515 Periphetes and Prothoön. Next the son of Atreus,
Menelaos, stabbed Hyperenor, shepherd of the people,
in the flank, so the bronze head let gush out the entrails
through the torn side. His life came out through the wound of the spearstab
in beating haste, and a mist of darkness closed over both eyes.
520 But Aias the fast-footed son of Oïleus caught and killed most,
since there was none like him in the speed of his feet to go after
men who ran, once Zeus had driven the terror upon them.

BOOK FIFTEEN

5

10

15

20

25

But after they had crossed back over the ditch and the sharp stakes
in flight, and many had gone down under the hands of the Danaäns,
they checked about once more and stood their ground by the chariots,
green for fear and terrified. But now Zeus wakened
by Hera of the gold throne on the high places of Ida,
and stood suddenly upright, and saw the Achaians and Trojans,
these driven to flight, the others harrying them in confusion,
these last Argives, and saw among them the lord Poseidon.
He saw Hektor lying in the plain, his companions sitting
around him, he dazed at the heart and breathing painfully,
vomiting blood, since not the weakest Achaian had hit him.
Then the father of gods and men seeing Hektor pitied him
and looked scowling terribly at Hera, and spoke a word to her:
“Hopeless one, it was your evil design, your treachery, Hera,
that stayed brilliant Hektor from battle, terrified his people.
I do not know, perhaps for this contrivance of evil
and pain you will win first reward when I lash you with whip strokes.
Do you not remember that time you hung from high and on your feet
I slung two anvils, and about your hands drove a golden
chain, unbreakable. You among the clouds and the bright sky
hung, nor could the gods about tall Olympos endure it
and stood about, but could not set you free. If I caught one
I would seize and throw him from the threshold, until he landed
stunned on the earth, yet even so the weariless agony
for Herakles the godlike would not let go my spirit.
You with the north wind’s aid winning over the stormwinds drove him
on across the desolate sea in evil intention
and then on these swept him away to Kos, the strong-founded.

I myself rescued him there and brought him back once more
30 to horse-pasturing Argos, when he had been through much hardship.
I will remind you of all this, so you will give up
your deceptions, see if your lovemaking in bed will help you,
that way you lay with me apart from the gods, and deceived me.”
35

40

45

50

55

60

He spoke, and the lady the ox-eyed goddess Hera was frightened
and she spoke to him and addressed him in winged words: “Now let
Earth be my witness in this, and the wide heaven above us,
and the dripping water of the Styx, which oath is the biggest
and most formidable oath among the blessed immortals.
The sanctity of your head be witness, and the bed of marriage
between us: a thing by which I at least could never swear vainly.
It is not through my will that the shaker of the earth Poseidon
afflicts the Trojans and Hektor and gives aid to the others,
but it is his own passion that urges him to it and drives him.
He saw the Achaians hard pressed beside their ships, and pitied them.
No, but I myself also would give him counsel
to go with you, O dark clouded, that way that you lead us.”
She spoke, and now the father of gods and men smiled on her
and spoke again in answer to her, and addressed her in winged words:
“If even you, lady Hera of the ox eyes, hereafter
were to take your place among the immortals thinking as I do,
then Poseidon, hard though he may wish it otherwise,
must at once turn his mind so it follows your heart, and my heart.
If now all this that you say is real, and you speak truthfully,
go now among the generations of the gods, and summon
Iris to come here to me, and Apollo the glorious archer,
so that Iris may go among the bronze-armored people
of the Achaians, and give a message to lord Poseidon
to leave the fighting and come back to the home that is his. Also
let Phoibos Apollo stir Hektor back into battle,
breathe strength into him once more, and make him forget the agonies
that now are wearing out his senses. Let him drive strengthless
panic into the Achaians, and turn them back once more;
let them be driven in flight and tumble back on the benched ships

of Achilleus, Peleus’ son. And he shall rouse up Patroklos
65 his companion. And glorious Hektor shall cut down Patroklos
with the spear before Ilion, after he has killed many others
of the young men, and among them my own son, shining Sarpedon.
In anger for him brilliant Achilleus shall then kill Hektor.
And from then on I would make the fighting surge back from the
vessels
70 always and continuously, until the Achaians
capture headlong Ilion through the designs of Athene.
Before this I am not stopping my anger, and I will not let
any other of the immortals stand there by the Danaäns
until the thing asked by the son of Peleus has been accomplished
75 as I undertook at the first and bent my head in assent to it
on that day when embracing my knees immortal Thetis
supplicated honor for Achilleus, sacker of cities.”
He spoke, and the goddess of the white arms Hera did not disobey
him
but went back to tall Olympos from the mountains of Ida.
80 As the thought flashes in the mind of a man who, traversing
much territory, thinks of things in the mind’s awareness,
“I wish I were this place, or this,” and imagines many things;
so rapidly in her eagerness winged Hera, a goddess.
She came to sheer Olympos and entered among the assembled
85 immortal gods in the house of Zeus, and they seeing her
rose all to swarm about her and lifted their cups in greeting.
But Hera passed by the others and accepted a cup from Themis
of the fair cheeks, since she had first come running to greet her
and had spoken to her and addressed her in winged words: “Hera,
90 why have you come? You seem like one who has been terrified.
I know, it was the son of Kronos, your husband, frightened you.”
In turn the goddess Hera of the white arms answered her:
“Ask me nothing of this, divine Themis. You yourself
know what his spirit is, how it is stubborn and arrogant.
95 Preside still over the gods in their house, the feast’s fair division.
Yet so much may you hear, and with you all the immortals,

how Zeus discloses evil actions, and I do not think
the heart of all will be pleasured alike, neither among mortals
nor gods either, although one now still feasts at his pleasure.”
100 The lady Hera spoke so and sat down, and the gods
about the house of Zeus were troubled. Hera was smiling
with her lips, but above the dark brows her forehead
was not at peace. She spoke before them all in vexation:
“Fools, we who try to work against Zeus, thoughtlessly.
105 Still we are thinking in our anger to go near, and stop him
by argument or force. He sits apart and cares nothing
nor thinks of us, and says that among the other immortals
he is pre-eminently the greatest in power and strength. Therefore
each of you must take whatever evil he sends you.
110 Since I think already a sorrow has been wrought against Ares.
His son has been killed in the fighting, dearest of all men
to him, Askalaphos, whom stark Ares calls his own son.”
So she spoke. Then Ares struck against both his big thighs
with the flats of his hands, and spoke a word of anger and sorrow:
115 “Now, you who have your homes on Olympos, you must not blame me
for going among the ships of the Achaians, and avenging my son’s
slaughter, even though it be my fate to be struck by Zeus’
thunderbolt, and sprawl in the blood and dust by the dead men.”
So he spoke, and ordered Fear and Terror to harness
120 his horses, and himself got into his shining armor.
And there might have been wrought another anger, and bitterness
from Zeus, still greater, more wearisome among the immortals,
had not Athene, in her fear for the sake of all gods,
sprung up and out through the forecourt, left her chair where she was
sitting,
125 and taken the helmet off from his head, the shield from his shoulders,
and snatched out of his heavy hand the bronze spear, and fixed it
apart, and then in speech reasoned with violent Ares:
“Madman, mazed of your wits, this is ruin! Your ears can listen
still to reality, but your mind is gone and your discipline.
130 Do you not hear what the goddess Hera of the white arms tells us,

and she coming back even now from Zeus of Olympos?
Do you wish, after running the course of many misfortunes
yourself, still to come back to Olympos under compulsion
though reluctant, and plant seed of great sorrow among the rest of us?
135 Since he will at once leave the Achaians and the high-hearted
Trojans, and come back to batter us on Olympos
and will catch up as they come the guilty one and the guiltless.
Therefore I ask of you to give up your anger for your son.
By now some other, better of his strength and hands than your son was,
140 has been killed, or will soon be killed; and it is a hard thing
to rescue all the generation and seed of all mortals.”
So she spoke, and seated on a chair violent Ares.
But Hera called to come with her outside the house Apollo
and Iris, who is messenger among the immortal
145 gods, and spoke to them and addressed them in winged words: “Zeus
wishes
both of you to go to him with all speed, at Ida;
but when you have come there and looked upon Zeus’ countenance,
then you must do whatever he urges you, and his orders.”
So the lady Hera spoke, and once more returning
150 sat on her throne. They in a flash of speed winged their way onward.
They came to Ida with all her springs, the mother of wild beasts,
and found the wide-browed son of Kronos on the height of Gargaron,
sitting still, and fragrant cloud gathered in a circle about him.
These two came into the presence of Zeus the cloud-gatherer
155 and stood, nor was his heart angry when he looked upon them,
seeing they had promptly obeyed the message of his dear lady.
He spoke to Iris first of the two, and addressed her in winged words:
“Go on your way now, swift Iris, to the lord Poseidon,
and give him all this message nor be a false messenger. Tell him
160 that he must now quit the war and the fighting, and go back
among the generations of gods, or into the bright sea.
And if he will not obey my words, or thinks nothing of them,
then let him consider in his heart and his spirit
that he might not, strong though he is, be able to stand up
165 to my attack; since I say I am far greater than he is

in strength, and elder born; yet his inward heart shrinks not from
calling
himself the equal of me, though others shudder before me.”
He spoke, and swift wind-footed Iris did not disobey him
but went down along the hills of Ida to sacred Ilion.
170 As those times when out of the clouds the snow or the hail whirls
cold beneath the blast of the north wind born in the bright air,
so rapidly in her eagerness winged Iris, the swift one,
and stood beside the famed shaker of the earth, and spoke to him:
“I have a certain message for you, dark-haired, earth-encircler,
175 and came here to bring it to you from Zeus of the aegis.
His order is that you quit the war and the fighting, and go back
among the generations of gods, or into the bright sea.
And if you will not obey his words, or think nothing of them,
his threat is that he himself will come to fight with you
180 here, strength against strength, but warns you to keep from under
his hands, since he says he is far greater than you are
in strength, and elder born. Yet your inward heart shrinks not from
calling
yourself the equal of him, though others shudder before him.”
Then deeply vexed the famed shaker of the earth spoke to her:
185 “No, no. Great though he is, this that he has said is too much,
if he will force me against my will, me, who am his equal
in rank. Since we are three brothers born by Rheia to Kronos,
Zeus, and I, and the third is Hades, lord of the dead men.
All was divided among us three ways, each given his domain.
190 I when the lots were shaken drew the gray sea to live in
forever; Hades drew the lot of the mists and the darkness,
and Zeus was allotted the wide sky, in the cloud and the bright air.
But earth and high Olympos are common to all three. Therefore
I am no part of the mind of Zeus. Let him in tranquility
195 and powerful as he is stay satisfied with his third share.
And let him absolutely stop frightening me, as if I were
mean, with his hands. It were better to keep for the sons and the
daughters

he got himself these blusterings and these threats of terror.
They will listen, because they must, to whatever he tells them.”
200 Then in turn swift wind-footed Iris answered him:
“Am I then to carry, O dark-haired, earth-encircler,
this word, which is strong and steep, back to Zeus from you?
Or will you change a little? The hearts of the great can be changed.
You know the Furies, how they forever side with the elder.”
205 Then in turn the shaker of the earth Poseidon spoke to her:
“Now this, divine Iris, was a word quite properly spoken.
It is a fine thing when a messenger is conscious of justice.
But this thing comes as a bitter sorrow to my heart and my spirit,
when Zeus tries in words of anger to reprimand one who
210 is his equal in station, and endowed with destiny like his.
Still, this time I will give way, for all my vexation.
But I will say this also, and make it a threat in my anger.
If ever, acting apart from me and Athene the spoiler,
apart from Hera and Hermes and the lord Hephaistos,
215 he shall spare headlong Ilion, and shall not be willing
to take it by storm, and bestow great victory on the Argives,
let him be sure, there will be no more healing of our anger.”
The shaker of the earth spoke, and left the Achaian people,
and went, merging in the sea, and the fighting Achaians longed for him.
220 After this Zeus who gathers the clouds spoke to Apollo:
“Go now, beloved Phoibos, to the side of brazen-helmed Hektor,
since by this he who encircles the earth and shakes it
is gone into the bright sea and has avoided the anger
that would be ours. In truth, this would have been a fight those other
225 gods would have heard about, who gather to Kronos beneath us.
Now this way it was far better for me, and for himself
also, that, for all his vexation before, he gave way
to my hands. We would have sweated before this business was finished.
Now yourself take up in your hands the aegis with fluttering
230 tassels, and shake it hard to scare the Achaian fighters.
Then, striker from afar, let your own concern be glorious Hektor.
So long waken the huge strength in him, until the Achaians

run in flight, and come to the ships and the crossing of Helle.
From there on I myself shall think of the word and the action
235 to make the Achaians get wind once more, after their hard fighting.”
He spoke so, and Apollo, not disregarding his father,
came down along the mountains of Ida in the likeness of a rapid
hawk, the dove’s murderer and swiftest of all things flying.
He found brilliant Hektor, the son of wise Priam, sitting
240 now, no longer sprawled, as he gathered new strength back into him
and recognized his companions about him. The sweat and hard
breathing
had begun to stop, once the will in Zeus of the aegis wakened him.
Apollo who works from afar stood beside him, and spoke to him:
“Hektor, son of Priam, why do you sit in such weakness
245 here apart from the others? Did some disaster befall you?”
In his weakness Hektor of the shining helm spoke to him:
“Who are you, who speak to me face to face, O noblest
of gods? Did you not know how by the Achaians’ grounded
ships, Aias of the great war cry struck me in the chest with a boulder
250 as I slaughtered his companions, and stayed my furious valor?
Truly, I thought that on this day I would come to the corpses
and the house of the death god, once I had breathed the inward life
from me.”
In turn the lord, the worker from afar, Apollo, spoke to him:
“Take heart; such an avenger am I whom the son of Kronos
255 sent down from Ida, to stand by your side and defend you,
Phoibos Apollo of the golden sword, who in time before this
also have stood to defend yourself and your sheer citadel.
So come now, and urge on your cavalry in their numbers
to drive on their horses against the hollow ships. Meanwhile
260 I shall move on before you and make all the way for the horses
smooth before them, and bend back the Achaian fighters.”
He spoke, and breathed huge strength into the shepherd of the people.
As when some stalled horse who has been corn-fed at the manger
breaking free of his rope gallops over the plain in thunder
265 to his accustomed bathing place in a sweet-running river
and in the pride of his strength holds high his head and the mane floats

over his shoulders; sure of his glorious strength, the quick knees
carry him to the loved places and the pasture of horses;
so Hektor moving rapidly his feet and his knees went
270 onward, stirring the horsemen when he heard the god’s voice speak.
And as when men who live in the wilds and their dogs have driven
into flight a horned stag or a wild goat. Inaccessible
the rocky cliff or the shadowed forest has covered the quarry
so that the men know it was not their fortune to take him;
275 and now by their clamoring shows in the way a great bearded
lion, and bends them to sudden flight for all their eagerness;
so the Danaäns until that time kept always in close chase
assembled, stabbing at them with swords and leaf-headed spears,
but when they saw Hektor once more ranging the men’s ranks
280 they were frightened, and by their feet collapsed all their bravery.

Now Thoas spoke forth among them, the son of Andraimon,
far the best of the Aitolians, one skilled in the spear’s throw
and brave in close fight. In assembly few of the Achaians
when the young men contended in debate could outdo him.
285 He in kind intention now spoke forth and addressed them:
“Can this be? Here is a strange thing I see with my own eyes,
how this Hektor has got to his feet once more, and eluded
the death spirits. I think in each of us the heart had high hope
he was killed under the hands of Telamonian Aias.
290 Now some one of the gods has come to his help and rescued
Hektor, who has unstrung the knees of so many Danaäns.
I think he will do it once more now. It is not without Zeus
the deep-thundering that he stands their champion in all this fury.
Come then, let us do as I say, let us all be persuaded.
295 Let us tell the multitude to make its way back toward the vessels
while we ourselves, who claim we are greatest in all the army,
stand, and see if we can face him first, and hold him off from them
with spears lifted against him, and I think for all of his fury
his heart will be afraid to plunge into our Danaän company.

300

So he spoke, and they listened to him with care, and obeyed him.
They who rallied about Aias, the lord Idomeneus,
Teukros, Meriones, and Meges, a man like the war god,
closed their order for hard impact, calling on the bravest
to face Hektor and the Trojans. Meanwhile behind them
305 the multitude made their way back toward the ships of the Achaians.
The Trojans came down on them in a pack, and Hektor led them
in long strides, and in front of him went Phoibos Apollo
wearing a mist about his shoulders, and held the tempestuous
terrible aegis, shaggy, conspicuous, that the bronze-smith
310 Hephaistos had given Zeus to wear to the terror of mortals.
Gripping this in both hands he led on the Trojan people.
But the Argives stood in close order against them, and the battle cry
rose up
in a thin scream from either side, the arrows from the bowstrings
jumping, while from violent hands the numerous thrown spears
315 were driven, some deep in the bodies of quick-stirring young men,
while many in the space between before they had got to the white skin
stood fast in the ground, though they had been straining to reach the
bodies.
So long as Phoibos Apollo held stilled in his hands the aegis,
so long the thrown weapons of both took hold, and men dropped under
them.
320 But when he stared straight into the eyes of the fast-mounted Danaäns
and shook the aegis, and himself gave a great baying cry, the spirit
inside them was mazed to hear it, they forgot their furious valor.
And they, as when in the dim of the black night two wild beasts
stampede a herd of cattle or big flock of sheep, falling
325 suddenly upon them, when no herdsman is by, the Achaians
fled so in their weakness and terror, since Apollo drove
terror upon them, and gave the glory to the Trojans and Hektor.
There man killed man all along the scattered encounter.
Hektor first killed Stichios and Arkesilaos,

330 one the leader of the bronze-armored Boiotians, the other
trusted companion in arms of great-hearted Menestheus.
But Aineias slaughtered Medon and Iasos. Of these
Medon was a bastard son of godlike Oïleus
and therefore brother of Aias, but had made his home in Phylakē
335 away from the land of his fathers, having killed a man, a relation
of Eriopis, his stepmother, the wife of Oïleus.
Iasos was a leader appointed of the Athenians,
and was called the son of Sphelos, the son of Boukolos.
Poulydamas killed Mekisteus, and Polites Echios
340 in the first onfall, and brilliant Agenor cut down Klonios.
Paris struck Deïochos from behind at the shoulder’s
base, as he ran away through the front ranks, and drove the bronze
clean through.
While these stripped the armor from their men, meanwhile the
Achaians
blundering about the deep-dug ditch and the sharp stakes
345 ran this way and that in terror, forced into their rampart.
But Hektor called aloud in a piercing cry to the Trojans:
“Make hard for the ships, let the bloody spoils be. That man
I see in the other direction apart from the vessels,
I will take care that he gets his death, and that man’s relations
350 neither men nor women shall give his dead body the rite of burning.
In the space before our city the dogs shall tear him to pieces.”
So speaking with a whipstroke from the shoulder he lashed on his
horses
calling across the ranks to the Trojans, who along with him
all cried aloud as they steered the horses who pulled their chariots,
355 with inhuman clamor, and in front of them Phoibos Apollo
easily, kicking them with his feet, tumbled the banked edges
of the deep ditch into the pit between, and bridged over a pathway
both wide and long, about as long as the force of a spearcast
goes when a man has thrown it to try his strength. They streamed over
360 in massed formation, with Apollo in front of them holding
the tremendous aegis, and wrecked the bastions of the Achaians
easily, as when a little boy piles sand by the seashore

when in his innocent play he makes sand towers to amuse him
and then, still playing, with hands and feet ruins them and wrecks them.
365 So you, lord Apollo, piled in confusion much hard work
and painful done by the Argives and drove terror among them.
So they reined in and stood fast again beside their ships, calling
aloud upon each other, and to all of the gods, uplifting
their hands each man of them cried out his prayers in a great voice,
370 and beyond others Gerenian Nestor, the Achaians’ watcher,
prayed, reaching out both arms to the starry heavens:
“Father Zeus, if ever in wheat-deep Argos one of us
burning before you the rich thigh pieces of sheep or ox prayed
he would come home again, and you nodded your head and assented,
375 remember this, Olympian, save us from the day without pity;
let not the Achaians be beaten down like this by the Trojans.”
So he spoke in prayer, and Zeus of the counsels thundered
a great stroke, hearing the prayer of the old man, the son of Neleus.
But the Trojans, hearing the thunderstroke of Zeus of the aegis,
380 remembered even more their warcraft, and sprang on the Argives.
They, as when the big waves on the sea wide-wandering
wash across the walls of a ship underneath the leaning
force of the wind, which particularly piles up the big waves,
so the Trojans with huge clamor went over the rampart
385 and drove their horses to fight alongside the grounded vessels,
with leaf-headed spears, some at close quarters, others from their
horses.
But the Achaians climbing high on their black ships fought from them
with long pikes that lay among the hulls for sea fighting,
shrouded about the heads in bronze that was soldered upon them.

390

Meanwhile Patroklos, all the time the Achaians and Trojans
were fighting on both sides of the wall, far away from the fast ships,
had sat all this time in the shelter of courtly Eurypylos
and had been entertaining him with words and applying

medicines that would mitigate the black pains to the sore wound.
395 But when he saw the Trojans were sweeping over the rampart
and the outcry and the noise of terror rose from the Danaäns
Patroklos groaned aloud then and struck himself on both thighs
with the flats of his hands and spoke a word of lamentation:
“Eurypylos, much though you need me I cannot stay here
400 longer with you. This is a big fight that has arisen.
Now it is for your henchman to look after you, while I
go in haste to Achilleus, to stir him into the fighting.
Who knows if, with God helping, I might trouble his spirit
by entreaty, since the persuasion of a friend is a strong thing.”
405 As he was speaking his feet carried him away. Meanwhile
the Achaians stood steady against the Trojan attack, but they could not
beat the enemy, fewer as they were, away from their vessels,
nor again had the Trojans strength to break the battalions
of the Danaäns, and force their way into the ships and the shelters.
410 But as a chalkline straightens the cutting of a ship’s timber
in the hands of an expert carpenter, who by Athene’s
inspiration is well versed in all his craft’s subtlety,
so the battles fought by both sides were pulled fast and even.
Now by the ships others fought in their various places
415 but Hektor made straight for glorious Aias. These two
were fighting hard for a single ship, and neither was able,
Hektor to drive Aias off the ship, and set fire to it,
nor Aias to beat Hektor back, since the divinity
drove him. Shining Aias struck with the spear Kaletor,
420 Klytios’ son, in the chest as he brought fire to the vessel.
He fell, thunderously, and the torch dropped from his hand. Then
Hektor, when his eyes were aware of his cousin fallen
in the dust in front of the black ship, uplifting
his voice in a great cry called to the Trojans and Lykians:
425 “Trojans, Lykians, Dardanians who fight at close quarters,
do not anywhere in this narrow place give way from the fighting
but stand by the son of Klytios, do not let the Achaians
strip the armor from him, fallen where the ships are assembled.”

So he spoke, and made a cast at Aias with the shining
430 spear, but missed him and struck the son of Mastor, Lykophron,
henchman of Aias from Kythera who had been living
with him; for he had killed a man in sacred Kythera.
Hektor struck him in the head above the ear with the sharp bronze
as he stood next to Aias, so that Lykophron sprawling
435 dropped from the ship’s stern to the ground, and his strength was
broken.
And Aias shuddered at the sight, and spoke to his brother:
“See, dear Teukros, our true companion, the son of Mastor,
is killed, who came to us from Kythera and in our household
was one we honored as we honored our beloved parents.
440 Now great-hearted Hektor has killed him. Where are your arrows
of sudden death, and the bow that Phoibos Apollo gave you?”
He spoke, and Teukros heard and came running to stand beside him
holding in his hand the backstrung bow and the quiver
to hold arrows, and let go his hard shots against the Trojans.
445 First he struck down Kleitos, the glorious son of Peisenor
and companion of Poulydamas, proud son of Panthoös.
Now Kleitos held the reins, and gave all his care to the horses,
driving them into that place where the most battalions were shaken,
for the favor of Hektor and the Trojans, but the sudden evil
450 came to him, and none for all their desire could defend him,
for the painful arrow was driven into his neck from behind him.
He fell out of the chariot, and the fast-footed horses
shied away, rattling the empty car; but Poulydamas
their master saw it at once, and ran first to the heads of the horses.
455 He gave them into the hands of Astynoös, Protiaon’s
son, with many orders to be watchful and hold the horses
close; then himself went back into the ranks of the champions.
But Teukros picked up another arrow for bronze-helmed
Hektor, and would have stopped his fighting by the ships of the
Achaians
460 had he hit him during his bravery and torn the life from him;
but he was not hidden from the close purpose of Zeus, who was
guarding

Hektor, and denied that glory to Telamonian Teukros;
who broke in the unfaulted bow the close-twisted sinew
as Teukros drew it against him, so the bronze-weighted arrow
465 went, as the bow dropped out of his hands, driven crazily sidewise.
And Teukros shuddered at the sight, and spoke to his brother:
“See now, how hard the divinity cuts across the intention
in all our battle, who struck the bow out of my hand, who has broken
the fresh-twisted sinew of the bowstring I bound on
470 this morning, so it would stand the succession of springing arrows.”
Then in turn huge Telamonian Aias answered him:
“Dear brother, then let your bow and your showering arrows
lie, now that the god begrudging the Danaäns wrecked them.
But take a long spear in your hands, a shield on your shoulder,
475 and close with the Trojans, and drive on the rest of your people.
Let them not, though they have beaten us, easily capture
our strong-benched ships. We must remember the frenzy of fighting.”
He spoke, and Teukros put away the bow in his shelter
and threw across his shoulders the shield of the fourfold ox-hide.
480 Over his mighty head he set the well-fashioned helmet
with the horse-hair crest, and the plumes nodded terribly above it.
Then he caught up a powerful spear, edged with sharp bronze,
and went on his way, running fast, and stood beside Aias.
But Hektor, when he saw how the arrows of Teukros were baffled,
485 lifted his voice in a great cry to the Trojans and Lykians:
“Trojans, Lykians, Dardanians who fight at close quarters,
be men now, dear friends, remember your furious valor
along the hollow ships, since I have seen with my own eyes
how by the hand of Zeus their bravest man’s arrows were baffled.
490 Easily seen is the strength that is given from Zeus to mortals
either in those into whose hands he gives the surpassing
glory, or those he diminishes and will not defend them
as now he diminishes the strength of the Argives, and helps us.
Fight on then by the ships together. He who among you
495 finds by spear thrown or spear thrust his death and destiny,
let him die. He has no dishonor when he dies defending

his country, for then his wife shall be saved and his children afterward,
and his house and property shall not be damaged, if the Achaians
must go away with their ships to the beloved land of their fathers.”
500 So he spoke, and stirred the spirit and strength in each man.
But Aias on the other side called to his companions:
“Shame, you Argives; here is the time of decision, whether
we die, or live on still and beat back ruin from our vessels.
Do you expect, if our ships fall to helm-shining Hektor,
505 you will walk each of you back dryshod to the land of your fathers?
Do you not hear how Hektor is stirring up all his people,
how he is raging to set fire to our ships? He is not
inviting you to come to a dance. He invites you to battle.
For us there can be no design, no purpose, better than this one,
510 to close in and fight with the strength of our hands at close quarters.
Better to take in a single time our chances of dying
or living, than go on being squeezed in the stark encounter
right up against our ships, as now, by men worse than we are.”
So he spoke, and stirred the spirit and strength in each man.
515 There Hektor killed the son of Perimedes, Schedios,
lord of the men of Phokis; but Aias killed Laodamas,
leader of the foot-soldiers, and shining son of Antenor.
Then Poulydamas stripped Otos of Kyllene, companion
to Meges, Phyleus’ son, and a lord among the great-hearted
520 Epeians. Meges seeing it lunged at him, but Poulydamas
bent down and away, so that Meges missed him. Apollo
would not let Panthoös’ son go down among the front fighters,
but Meges stabbed with the spear the middle of the chest of Kroismos.
He fell, thunderously, and Meges was stripping the armor
525 from his shoulders, but meanwhile Dolops lunged at him, Lampos’
son, a man crafty with the spear and strongest of the sons born
to Lampos, Laomedon’s son, one skilled in furious fighting.
He from close up stabbed with his spear at the shield of Phyleides
in the middle, but the corselet he wore defended him, solid
530 and built with curving plates of metal, which in days past Phyleus
had taken home from Ephyra and the river Selleëis.
A guest and friend had given him it, lord of men, Euphetes,

to carry into the fighting and beat off the attack of the enemy,
and now it guarded the body of his son from destruction.
535 But Meges stabbed with the sharp spear at the uttermost summit
of the brazen helmet thick with horse-hair, and tore off
the mane of horse-hair from the helmet, so that it toppled
groundward and lay in the dust in all its new shining of purple.
Yet Dolops stood his ground and fought on, in hope still of winning,
540 but meanwhile warlike Menelaos came to stand beside Meges,
and came from the side and unobserved with his spear, and from behind
threw at his shoulder, so the spear tore through his chest in its fury
to drive on, so that Dolops reeled and went down, face forward.
The two of them swept in to strip away from his shoulders
545 the bronze armor, but Hektor called aloud to his brothers,
the whole lot, but first scolded the son of Hiketaon,
strong Melanippos. He in Perkote had tended his lumbering
cattle, in the days before when the enemy were still far off;
but when the oarswept ships of the Danaäns came, then
550 he returned to Ilion, and was a great man among the Trojans,
and lived with Priam, who honored him as he honored his children.
Now Hektor spoke a word and called him by name and scolded him:
“Shall we give way so, Melanippos? Does it mean nothing
even to you in the inward heart that your cousin is fallen?
555 Do you not see how they are busied over the armor of Dolops?
Come on, then; no longer can we stand far off and fight with
the Argives. Sooner we must kill them, or else sheer Ilion
be stormed utterly by them, and her citizens be killed.”
He spoke, and led the way, and the other followed, a mortal
560 godlike. But huge Telamonian Aias stirred on the Argives:
“Dear friends, be men; let shame be in your hearts, and discipline,
and have consideration for each other in the strong encounters,
since more come through alive when men consider each other,
and there is no glory when they give way, nor warcraft either.”
565 He spoke, and they likewise grew furious in their defense,
and put his word away in their hearts, and fenced in their vessels
in a circle of bronze, but Zeus against them wakened the Trojans.

Then Menelaos of the great war cry stirred on Antilochos:
“Antilochos, no other Achaian is younger than you are,
570 nor faster on his feet, nor strong as you are in fighting.
You could make an outrush and strike down some man of the Trojans.”
So speaking, he hastened back but stirred Antilochos onward,
and he sprang forth from the champions and hefted the shining javelin,
glaring round about him, and the Trojans gave way in the face
575 of the man throwing with the spear. And he made no vain cast
but struck Hiketaon’s son, Melanippos the high-hearted,
in the chest next to the nipple as he swept into the fighting.
He fell, thunderously, and darkness closed over both eyes.
Antilochos sprang forth against him, as a hound rushes
580 against a stricken fawn that as he broke from his covert
a hunter has shot at, and hit, and broken his limbs’ strength.
So Antilochos stubborn in battle sprang, Melanippos,
at you, to strip your armor, but did not escape brilliant Hektor’s
notice, who came on the run through the fighting against him.
585 Antilochos did not hold his ground, although a swift fighter,
but fled away like a wild beast who has done some bad thing,
one who has killed a hound or an ox-herd tending his cattle
and escapes, before a gang of men has assembled against him;
so Nestor’s son ran away, and after him the Trojans and Hektor
590 with unearthly clamor showered their groaning weapons against him.
He turned and stood when he got into the swarm of his own
companions.
But the Trojans in the likeness of ravening lions swept on
against the ships, and were bringing to accomplishment Zeus’ orders,
who wakened always the huge strength in them, dazed the courage
595 of the Argives, and denied their glory, and stirred on the others.
Zeus’ desire was to give glory to the son of Priam,
Hektor, that he might throw on the curved ships the inhuman
weariless strength of fire, and so make completely accomplished
the prayer of Thetis. Therefore Zeus of the counsels waited
600 the sight before his eyes of the flare, when a single ship burned.
From thereon he would make the attack of the Trojans

surge back again from the ships, and give the Danaäns glory.
With this in mind he drove on against the hollow ships Hektor,
Priam’s son, though Hektor without the god was in fury
605 and raged, as when destructive fire or spear-shaking Ares
rages among the mountains and dense places of the deep forest.
A slaver came out around his mouth, and under the lowering
brows his eyes were glittering, the helm on his temples
was shaken and thundered horribly to the fighting of Hektor.
610 Out of the bright sky Zeus himself was working to help him
and among men so numerous he honored this one man
and glorified him, since Hektor was to have only a short life
and already the day of his death was being driven upon him
by Pallas Athene through the strength of Achilleus. And now
615 he was probing the ranks of men, and trying to smash them,
and made for where there were most men together, and the best armor.
But even so he could not break them, for all his fury,
for they closed into a wall and held him, like some towering
huge sea-cliff that lies close along the gray salt water
620 and stands up against the screaming winds and their sudden directions
and against the waves that grow to bigness and burst up against it.
So the Danaäns stood steady against the Trojans, nor gave way.
But he, lit about with flame on all sides, charged on their numbers
and descended upon them as descends on a fast ship the battering
625 wave storm-bred from beneath the clouds, and the ship goes utterly
hidden under the foam, and the dangerous blast of the hurricane
thunders against the sail, and the hearts of the seamen are shaken
with fear, as they are carried only a little way out of death’s reach.
So the heart in the breast of each Achaian was troubled.
630 Hektor came on against them, as a murderous lion on cattle
who in the low-lying meadow of a great marsh pasture
by hundreds, and among them a herdsman who does not quite know
how to fight a wild beast off from killing a horn-curved
ox, and keeps pace with the first and the last of the cattle
635 always, but the lion making his spring at the middle
eats an ox as the rest stampede; so now the Achaians
fled in unearthly terror before father Zeus and Hektor,

all, but he got one only, Periphetes of Mykenai,
beloved son of Kopreus, who for the lord Eurystheus
640 had gone often with messages to powerful Herakles.
To him, a meaner father, was born a son who was better
for all talents, in the speed of his feet and in battle
and for intelligence counted among the first in Mykenai.
Thereby now higher was the glory he granted to Hektor.
645 For as he whirled about to get back, he fell over the out-rim
of the shield he carried, which reached to his feet to keep the spears
from him.
Stumbling on this he went over on his back, and the helmet
that circled his temples clashed horribly as he went down.
Hektor saw it sharply, and ran up and stood beside him,
650 and stuck the spear into his chest and killed him before the eyes
of his dear friends, who for all their sorrowing could do nothing
to help their companion, being themselves afraid of great Hektor.
Now they had got among the ships, and the ends were about them
of the ships hauled up in the first line, but the Trojans swarmed
655 on them. The Argives under force gave back from the first line
of their ships, but along the actual shelters they rallied
in a group, and did not scatter along the encampment. Shame held them
and fear. They kept up a continuous call to each other,
and beyond others Gerenian Nestor, the Achaians’ watcher,
660 supplicated each man by the knees for the sake of his parents.
“Dear friends, be men; let shame be in your hearts and discipline
in the sight of other men, and each one of you remember
his children and his wife, his property and his parents,
whether a man’s father and mother live or have died. Here now
665 I supplicate your knees for the sake of those who are absent
to stand strongly and not be turned to the terror of panic.”
So he spoke, and stirred the spirit and heart in each man,
and from their eyes Athene pushed the darkness immortal
of mist, and the light came out hard against them on both sides
670 whether they looked from the ships or from the closing of battle.
They knew Hektor of the great war cry, they knew his companions

whether they stood away behind and out of the fighting
or whether alongside the fast ships they fought in the battle.
Nor did it still please great-hearted Aias to stand back
675 where the other sons of the Achaians had taken position;
but he went in huge strides up and down the decks of the vessels.
He wielded in his hands a great pike for sea fighting,
twenty-two cubits long and joined together by clinchers.
And as a man who is an expert rider of horses
680 who when he has chosen and coupled four horses out of many
makes his way over the plain galloping toward a great city
along the traveled road, and many turn to admire him,
men or women, while he steadily and never slipping
jumps and shifts his stance from one to another as they gallop;
685 so Aias ranged crossing from deck to deck of the fast ships
taking huge strides, and his voice went always up to the bright sky
as he kept up a terrible bellow and urged on the Danaäns
to defend their ships and their shelters, while on the other side Hektor
would not stay back among the mass of close-armored Trojans,
690 but as a flashing eagle makes his plunge upon other
flying birds as these feed in a swarm by a river,
whether these be geese or cranes or swans long-throated,
so Hektor steered the course of his outrush straight for a vessel
with dark prows, and from behind Zeus was pushing him onward
695 hard with his big hand, and stirred on his people beside him.

Now once again a grim battle was fought by the vessels;
you would say that they faced each other unbruised, unwearied
in the fighting, from the speed in which they went for each other.
This was the thought in each as they struggled on: the Achaians
700 thought they could not get clear of the evil, but must perish,
while the heart inside each one of the Trojans was hopeful
to set fire to the ships and kill the fighting men of Achaia.
With such thoughts in mind they stood up to fight with each other.
Hektor caught hold of the stern of a grand, fast-running,

705 seafaring ship, that once had carried Protesilaos
to Troy, and did not take him back to the land of his fathers.
It was around his ship that now Achaians and Trojans
cut each other down at close quarters, nor any longer
had patience for the volleys exchanged from bows and javelins
710 but stood up close against each other, matching their fury,
and fought their battle with sharp hatchets and axes, with great
swords and with leaf-headed pikes, and many magnificent
swords were scattered along the ground, black-thonged, heavy-hilted,
sometimes dropping from the hands, some glancing from shoulders
715 of men as they fought, so the ground ran black with blood. Hektor
would not let go of the stern of a ship where he had caught hold of it
but gripped the sternpost in his hands and called to the Trojans:
“Bring fire, and give single voice to the clamor of battle.
Now Zeus has given us a day worth all the rest of them:
720 the ships’ capture, the ships that came here in spite of the gods’ will
and have visited much pain on us, by our counselors’ cowardice
who would not let me fight by the grounded ships, though I wanted to,
but held me back in restraint, and curbed in our fighters.
But Zeus of the wide brows, though then he fouled our intentions,
725 comes now himself to urge us on and give us encouragement.”
He spoke, and they thereby came on harder against the Argives.
Their volleys were too much for Aias, who could hold no longer
his place, but had to give back a little, expecting to die there,
back to the seven-foot midship, and gave up the high deck of the
balanced
730 ship. There he stood and waited for them, and with his pike always
beat off any Trojan who carried persistent fire from the vessels.
He kept up a terrible bellowing, and urged on the Danaäns:
“Friends and fighting men of the Danaäns, henchmen of Ares,
be men now, dear friends, remember your furious valor.
735 Do we think there are others who stand behind us to help us?
Have we some stronger wall that can rescue men from perdition?
We have no city built strong with towers lying near us, within which
we could defend ourselves and hold off this host that matches us.
We hold position in this plain of the close-armored Trojans,

740 bent back against the sea, and far from the land of our fathers.
Salvation’s light is in our hands’ work, not the mercy of battle.”
He spoke, and came forward with his sharp spear, raging for battle.
And whenever some Trojan crashed against the hollow ships
with burning fire, who sought to wake the favor of Hektor,
745 Aias would wait for him and then stab with the long pike
and so from close up wounded twelve in front of the vessels.

BOOK SIXTEEN

So they fought on both sides for the sake of the strong-benched
vessel.
Meanwhile Patroklos came to the shepherd of the people, Achilleus,
and stood by him and wept warm tears, like a spring dark-running
that down the face of a rock impassable drips its dim water;
5 and swift-footed brilliant Achilleus looked on him in pity,
and spoke to him aloud and addressed him in winged words: “Why
then
are you crying like some poor little girl, Patroklos,
who runs after her mother and begs to be picked up and carried,
and clings to her dress, and holds her back when she tries to hurry,
10 and gazes tearfully into her face, until she is picked up?
You are like such a one, Patroklos, dropping these soft tears.
Could you have some news to tell, for me or the Myrmidons?
Have you, and nobody else, received some message from Phthia?
Yet they tell me Aktor’s son Menoitios lives still
15 and Aiakos’ son Peleus lives still among the Myrmidons.
If either of these died we should take it hard. Or is it
the Argives you are mourning over, and how they are dying
against the hollow ships by reason of their own arrogance?
Tell me, do not hide it in your mind, and so we shall both know.”
20 Then groaning heavily, Patroklos the rider, you answered:
“Son of Peleus, far greatest of the Achaians, Achilleus,
do not be angry; such grief has fallen upon the Achaians.
For all those who were before the bravest in battle
are lying up among the ships with arrow or spear wounds.
25 The son of Tydeus, strong Diomedes, was hit by an arrow,
and Odysseus has a pike wound, and Agamemnon the spear-famed,

30

35

40

45

and Eurypylos has been wounded in the thigh with an arrow.
And over these the healers skilled in medicine are working
to cure their wounds. But you, Achilleus; who can do anything
with you? May no such anger take me as this that you cherish!
Cursed courage. What other man born hereafter shall be advantaged
unless you beat aside from the Argives this shameful destruction?
Pitiless: the rider Peleus was never your father
nor Thetis was your mother, but it was the gray sea that bore you
and the towering rocks, so sheer the heart in you is turned from us.
But if you are drawing back from some prophecy known in your own
heart
and by Zeus’ will your honored mother has told you of something,
then send me out at least, let the rest of the Myrmidon people
follow me, and I may be a light given to the Danaäns.
Give me your armor to wear on my shoulders into the fighting;
so perhaps the Trojans might think I am you, and give way
from their attack, and the fighting sons of the Achaians get wind
again after hard work. There is little breathing space in the fighting.
We unwearied might with a mere cry pile men wearied
back upon their city, and away from the ships and the shelters.”

So he spoke supplicating in his great innocence; this was
his own death and evil destruction he was entreating.
But now, deeply troubled, swift-footed Achilleus answered him:
“Ah, Patroklos, illustrious, what is this you are saying?
50 I have not any prophecy in mind that I know of;
there is no word from Zeus my honored mother has told me,
but this thought comes as a bitter sorrow to my heart and my spirit
when a man tries to foul one who is his equal, to take back
a prize of honor, because he goes in greater authority.
55 This is a bitter thought to me; my desire has been dealt with
roughly. The girl the sons of the Achaians chose out for my honor,
and I won her with my own spear, and stormed a strong-fenced city,
is taken back out of my hands by powerful Agamemnon,
the son of Atreus, as if I were some dishonored vagabond.
60 Still, we will let all this be a thing of the past; and it was not

in my heart to be angry forever; and yet I have said
I would not give over my anger until that time came
when the fighting with all its clamor came up to my own ships.
So do you draw my glorious armor about your shoulders;
65 lead the Myrmidons whose delight is battle into the fighting,
if truly the black cloud of the Trojans has taken position
strongly about our ships, and the others, the Argives, are bent back
against the beach of the sea, holding only a narrow division
of land, and the whole city of the Trojans has descended upon them
70 boldly; because they do not see the face of my helmet
glaring close; or else they would run and cram full of dead men
the water-courses; if powerful Agamemnon treated me
kindly. Now the Argives fight for their very encampment.
For the spear rages not now in the hands of the son of Tydeus,
75 Diomedes, to beat destruction aside from the Danaäns,
nor have I heard the voice of the son of Atreus crying
from his hated head; no, but the voice of murderous Hektor
calling to the Trojans crashes about my ears; with their war cry
they hold the entire plain as they beat the Achaians in battle.
80 But even so, Patroklos, beat the bane aside from our ships; fall
upon them with all your strength; let them not with fire’s blazing
inflame our ships, and take away our desired homecoming.
But obey to the end this word I put upon your attention
so that you can win, for me, great honor and glory
85 in the sight of all the Danaäns, so they will bring back to me
the lovely girl, and give me shining gifts in addition.
When you have driven them from the ships, come back; although later
the thunderous lord of Hera might grant you the winning of glory,
you must not set your mind on fighting the Trojans, whose delight
90 is in battle, without me. So you will diminish my honor.
You must not, in the pride and fury of fighting, go on
slaughtering the Trojans, and lead the way against Ilion,
for fear some one of the everlasting gods on Olympos
might crush you. Apollo who works from afar loves these people
95 dearly. You must turn back once you bring the light of salvation
to the ships, and let the others go on fighting in the flat land.

Father Zeus, Athene and Apollo, if only
not one of all the Trojans could escape destruction, not one
of the Argives, but you and I could emerge from the slaughter
100 so that we two alone could break Troy’s hallowed coronal.”
Now as these two were talking thus to each other, meanwhile
the volleys were too much for Aias, who could hold no longer
his place. The will of Zeus beat him back, and the proud Trojans
with their spears, and around his temples the shining helmet
105 clashed horribly under the shower of strokes; he was hit constantly
on the strong-wrought cheek-pieces, and his left shoulder was tiring
from always holding up the big glittering shield; yet they could not
beat him out of his place, though they piled their missiles upon him.
His breath came ever hard and painful, the sweat ran pouring
110 down his body from every limb, he could find no means
to catch his breath, but evil was piled on evil about him.
Tell me now, you Muses who have your homes on Olympos,
how fire was first thrown upon the ships of the Achaians.
Hektor stood up close to Aias and hacked at the ash spear
115 with his great sword, striking behind the socket of the spearhead,
and slashed it clean away, so that Telamonian Aias
shook there in his hand a lopped spear, while far away from him
the bronze spearhead fell echoing to the ground; and Aias
knew in his blameless heart, and shivered for knowing it, how this
120 was gods’ work, how Zeus high-thundering cut across the intention
in all his battle, how he planned that the Trojans should conquer.
He drew away out of the missiles, and the Trojans threw weariless fire
on the fast ship, and suddenly the quenchless flame streamed over it.
So the fire was at work on the ship’s stern; but Achilleus
125 struck his hands against both his thighs, and called to Patroklos:
“Rise up, illustrious Patroklos, rider of horses.
I see how the ravening fire goes roaring over our vessels.
They must not get our ships so we cannot run away in them.
Get on your armor; faster; I will muster our people.”

130

He spoke, and Patroklos was helming himself in bronze that
glittered.
First he placed along his legs the beautiful greaves, linked
with silver fastenings to hold the greaves at the ankles.
Afterward he girt on about his chest the corselet
starry and elaborate of swift-footed Aiakides.
135 Across his shoulders he slung the sword with the nails of silver,
a bronze sword, and above it the great shield, huge and heavy.
Over his mighty head he set the well-fashioned helmet
with the horse-hair crest, and the plumes nodded terribly above it.
He took up two powerful spears that fitted his hand’s grip,
140 only he did not take the spear of blameless Aiakides,
huge, heavy, thick, which no one else of all the Achaians
could handle, but Achilleus alone knew how to wield it;
the Pelian ash spear which Cheiron had brought to his father
from high on Pelion to be death for fighters. Patroklos
145 ordered Automedon rapidly to harness the horses,
a man he honored most, after Achilleus breaker of battles,
who stood most staunchly by him against the fury of fighting.
For him Automedon led the fast-running horses under
the yoke, Xanthos and Balios, who tore with the winds’ speed,
150 horses stormy Podarge once conceived of the west wind
and bore, as she grazed in the meadow beside the swirl of the Ocean.
In the traces beside these he put unfaulted Pedasos
whom Achilleus brought back once when he stormed Eëtion’s city.
He, mortal as he was, ran beside the immortal horses.
155 But Achilleus went meanwhile to the Myrmidons, and arrayed them
all in their war gear along the shelters. And they, as wolves
who tear flesh raw, in whose hearts the battle fury is tireless,
who have brought down a great horned stag in the mountains, and then
feed
on him, till the jowls of every wolf run blood, and then go
160 all in a pack to drink from a spring of dark-running water,
lapping with their lean tongues along the black edge of the surface

and belching up the clotted blood; in the heart of each one
is a spirit untremulous, but their bellies are full and groaning;
as such the lords of the Myrmidons and their men of counsel
165 around the brave henchman of swift-footed Aiakides
swarmed, and among them was standing warlike Achilleus
and urged on the fighting men with their shields, and the horses.
Fifty were the fast-running ships wherein Achilleus
beloved of Zeus had led his men to Troy, and in each one
170 were fifty men, his companions in arms, at the rowing benches.
He had made five leaders among them, and to these entrusted
the command, while he in his great power was lord over all of them.
One battalion was led by Menesthios of the shining
corselet, son of Spercheios, the river swelled from the bright sky,
175 born of the daughter of Peleus, Polydore the lovely,
to unremitting Spercheios, when a woman lay with an immortal;
but born in name to Perieres’ son, Boros, who married
Polydore formally, and gave gifts beyond count to win her.
The next battalion was led by warlike Eudoros, a maiden’s
180 child, born to one lovely in the dance, Polymele,
daughter of Phylas; whom strong Hermes Argeïphontes
loved, when he watched her with his eyes among the girls dancing
in the choir for clamorous Artemis of the golden distaff.
Presently Hermes the healer went up with her into her chamber
185 and lay secretly with her, and she bore him a son, the shining
Eudoros, a surpassing runner and a quick man in battle.
But after Eileithyia of the hard pains had brought out
the child into the light, and he looked on the sun’s shining,
Aktor’s son Echekles in the majesty of his great power
190 led her to his house, when he had given numberless gifts to win her,
and the old man Phylas took the child and brought him up kindly
and cared for him, in affection as if he had been his own son.
The leader of the third battalion was warlike Peisandros,
Maimalos’ son, who outshone all the rest of the Myrmidons
195 in spear-fighting, next to Peleian Achilleus’ henchman.
The fourth battalion was led by Phoinix, the aged horseman,

the fifth by Alkimedon, the blameless son of Laërkes.
But after Achilleus gave them their stations all in good order
beside their leaders, he laid his stern injunction upon them:
200 “Myrmidons: not one of you can forget those mutterings,
those threats that beside the running ships you made at the Trojans
in all the time of my anger, and it was I you were blaming,
as: ‘Hard son of Peleus! Your mother nursed you on gall. You have no
pity, to keep your companions here by the ships unwilling.
205 We should go back home again, then, in our seafaring vessels
now that this wretched anger has befallen your spirit.
’ Often you would gather in groups and so mutter against me,
and now is shown a great work of that fighting you longed for.
Then let each man take heart of strength to fight with the Trojans.”

210

So he spoke, and stirred the spirit and strength in each man,
and their ranks, as they listened to the king, pulled closer together.
And as a man builds solid a wall with stones set close together
for the rampart of a high house keeping out the force of the winds, so
close together were the helms and shields massive in the middle.
215 For shield leaned on shield, helmet on helmet, man against man,
and the horse-hair crests along the horns of the shining helmets
touched as they bent their heads, so dense were they formed on each
other.
And before them all were two men in their armor, Patroklos
and Automedon, both of them in one single fury
220 to fight in front of the Myrmidons. But meanwhile Achilleus
went off into his shelter, and lifted the lid from a lovely
elaborately wrought chest, which Thetis the silver-footed
had put in his ship to carry, and filled it fairly with tunics
and mantles to hold the wind from a man, and with fleecy blankets.
225 Inside this lay a wrought goblet, nor did any other
man drink the shining wine from it nor did Achilleus
pour from it to any other god, but only Zeus father.
He took this now out of the chest, and cleaned it with sulfur

first, and afterward washed it out in bright-running water,
230 and washed his own hands, and poured shining wine into the goblet
and stood in his middle forecourt and prayed, and poured the wine,
looking
into the sky, not unseen by Zeus who delights in the thunder:
“High Zeus, lord of Dodona, Pelasgian, living afar off,
brooding over wintry Dodona, your prophets about you
235 living, the Selloi who sleep on the ground with feet unwashed. Hear
me.
As one time before when I prayed to you, you listened
and did me honor, and smote strongly the host of the Achaians,
so one more time bring to pass the wish that I pray for.
For see, I myself am staying where the ships are assembled,
240 but I send out my companion and many Myrmidons with him
to fight. Let glory, Zeus of the wide brows, go forth with him.
Make brave the heart inside his breast, so that even Hektor
will find out whether our henchman knows how to fight his battles
by himself, or whether his hands rage invincible only
245 those times when I myself go into the grind of the war god.
But when he has beaten back from the ships their clamorous onset,
then let him come back to me and the running ships, unwounded,
with all his armor and with the companions who fight close beside
him.”
So he spoke in prayer, and Zeus of the counsels heard him.
250 The father granted him one prayer, and denied him the other.
That Patroklos should beat back the fighting assault on the vessels
he allowed, but refused to let him come back safe out of the fighting.
When Achilleus had poured the wine and prayed to Zeus father
he went back into the shelter, stowed the cup in the chest, and came out
255 to stand in front of the door, with the desire in his heart still
to watch the grim encounter of Achaians and Trojans.
Now they who were armed in the company of great-hearted Patroklos
went onward, until in high confidence they charged on the Trojans.
The Myrmidons came streaming out like wasps at the wayside
260 when little boys have got into the habit of making them angry

by always teasing them as they live in their house by the roadside;
silly boys, they do something that hurts many people;
and if some man who travels on the road happens to pass them
and stirs them unintentionally, they in heart of fury
265 come swarming out each one from his place to fight for their children.
In heart and in fury like these the Myrmidons streaming
came out from their ships, with a tireless clamor arising,
and Patroklos called afar in a great voice to his companions:
“Myrmidons, companions of Peleus’ son, Achilleus,
270 be men now, dear friends, remember your furious valor;
we must bring honor to Peleus’ son, far the greatest of the Argives
by the ships, we, even the henchmen who fight beside him,
so Atreus’ son wide-ruling Agamemnon may recognize
his madness, that he did no honor to the best of the Achaians.”
275 So he spoke, and stirred the spirit and strength in each man.
They fell upon the Trojans in a pack, and about them
the ships echoed terribly to the roaring Achaians.
But the Trojans, when they saw the powerful son of Menoitios
himself and his henchman with him in the glare of their war gear,
280 the heart was stirred in all of them, the battalions were shaken
in the expectation that by the ships swift-footed Peleion
had thrown away his anger and chosen the way of friendship.
Then each man looked about him for a way to escape the sheer death.
Patroklos was the first man to make a cast with the shining
285 spear, straight through the middle fighting, where most men were
stricken,
beside the stern on the ship of great-hearted Protesilaos,
and struck Pyraichmes, who had led the lords of Paionian
horses from Amydon and the wide waters of Axios.
He struck him in the right shoulder, so he dropped in the dust groaning,
290 on his back, and his Paionian companions about him
scattered; for Patroklos drove the fear into all of them
when he cut down their leader, the best of them all in battle.
He drove them from the ships and put out the fire that was blazing,
and that ship was left half-burnt as it was, as the Trojans scattered
295 in terror and unearthly noise, and the Danaäns streamed back

along the hollow ships, and clamor incessant rose up.
And as when from the towering height of a great mountain Zeus
who gathers the thunderflash stirs the cloud dense upon it,
and all the high places of the hills are clear and the shoulders outjutting
300 and the deep ravines, as endless bright air spills from the heavens,
so when the Danaäns had beaten from their ships the ravening
fire, they got breath for a little, but there was no check in the fighting;
for the Trojans under the attack of the warlike Achaians
had not yet turned their faces to run away from the black ships.
305 They stood yet against them, but gave way from the ships under
pressure.

There man killed man all along the scattered encounter
of the leaders, and first among them, the strong son of Menoitios,
threw and struck Areïlykos in the thigh, as he turned
back, with the sharp point of the spear, and drove the bronze clean
through.
310 The spear smashed in the bone and he fell to the ground headlong
on his face. Meanwhile warlike Menelaos stabbed Thoas
in the chest where it was left bare by the shield, and unstrung his limbs’
strength.
Meges, Phyleus’ son, watched Amphiklos as he came on
and was too quick with a stab at the base of the leg, where the muscle
315 of a man grows thickest, so that on the spearhead the sinew
was torn apart, and a mist of darkness closed over both eyes.
Of the sons of Nestor one, Antilochos, stabbed Atymnios
with the sharp spear, and drove the bronze head clean through his flank,
so
that he fell forward; but Maris with the spear from close up
320 made a lunge at Antilochos in rage for his brother
standing in front of the corpse, but before him godlike Thrasymedes
was in with a thrust before he could stab, nor missed his quick stroke

into the shoulder, and the spearhead shore off the arm’s base
clear away from the muscles and torn from the bone utterly.
325 He fell, thunderously, and darkness closed over both eyes.
So these two, beaten down under the hands of two brothers,
descended to the dark place, Sarpedon’s noble companions
and spear-throwing sons of Amisodaros, the one who had nourished
the furious Chimaira to be an evil to many.
330 Aias, Oïleus’ son, in an outrush caught Kleoboulos
alive, where he was fouled in the running confusion, and there
unstrung his strength, hewing with the hilted sword at the neck,
so all the sword was smoking with blood and over both eyes
closed the red death and the strong destiny. Then Peneleos
335 and Lykon ran up close together, since these with their spear-throws
had gone wide of each other, and each had made a cast vainly.
So now the two of them ran together with swords. There Lykon
hacked at the horn of the horse-hair crested helm, but the sword blade
broke at the socket; Peneleos cut at the neck underneath
340 the ear, and the sword sank clean inside, with only skin left
to hold it, and the head slumped aside, and the limbs were loosened.
Meriones on his light feet overtaking Akamas
stabbed him in the right shoulder as he climbed up behind his horses
and the darkness drifted over his eyes as he crashed from the chariot.
345 Idomeneus stabbed Erymas in the mouth with the pitiless
bronze, so that the brazen spearhead smashed its way clean through
below the brain in an upward stroke, and the white bones splintered,
and the teeth were shaken out with the stroke and both eyes filled up
with blood, and gaping he blew a spray of blood through the nostrils
350 and through his mouth, and death in a dark mist closed in about him.
So these lords of the Danaäns killed each his own man.
They as wolves make havoc among lambs or young goats in their fury,
catching them out of the flocks, when the sheep separate in the
mountains
through the thoughtlessness of the shepherd, and the wolves seeing
them
355 suddenly snatch them away, and they have no heart for fighting;

so the Danaäns ravaged the Trojans, and these remembered
the bitter sound of terror, and forgot their furious valor.
But the great Aias was trying forever to make a spearcast
at bronze-helmed Hektor, but he in his experience of fighting
360 with his broad shoulders huddled under the bull’s-hide shield kept
watching always the whistle of arrows, the crash of spears thrown.
He knew well how the strength of the fighting shifted against him,
but even so stood his ground to save his steadfast companions.
As when a cloud goes deep into the sky from Olympos
365 through the bright upper air when Zeus brings on the hurricane,
so rose from beside the ships their outcry, the noise of their terror.
In no good order they went back, while his fast-running horses
carried Hektor away in his armor; he abandoned the people
of the Trojans, who were trapped by the deep-dug ditch unwilling,
370 and in the ditch many fast horses who pulled the chariots
left, broken short at the joining of the pole, their masters’ chariots
while Patroklos was on them, calling hard and loud to the Danaäns
with evil intention for the Trojans, who, in clamorous terror,
choked all the ways where they were cut off; from under their feet
stirred
375 the dust-storm scattered in clouds, their single-foot horses were
straining
to get back to the city away from the ships and the shelters.
But Patroklos, where he saw the stirring of most people,
steered there, shouting, and men went down under the axles
headlong from chariots as the empty cars rattled onward.
380 Straight across the ditch overleapt those swift and immortal
horses the gods had given as shining gifts to Peleus,
hurtling onward, as Patroklos’ rage stirred him against Hektor,
whom he tried to strike, but his fast horses carried him out of it.
As underneath the hurricane all the black earth is burdened
385 on an autumn day, when Zeus sends down the most violent waters
in deep rage against mortals after they stir him to anger
because in violent assembly they pass decrees that are crooked,
and drive righteousness from among them and care nothing for what
the gods think,

and all the rivers of these men swell current to full spate
390 and in the ravines of their water-courses rip all the hillsides
and dash whirling in huge noise down to the blue sea, out of
the mountains headlong, so that the works of men are diminished;
so huge rose the noise from the horses of Troy in their running.
But Patroklos, when he had cut away their first battalions,
395 turned back to pin them against the ships, and would not allow them
to climb back into their city though they strained for it, but sweeping
through the space between the ships, the high wall, and the river,
made havoc and exacted from them the blood price for many.
There first of all he struck with the shining spear Pronoös
400 in the chest where it was left bare by the shield, and unstrung his
limbs’ strength.
He fell, thunderously, and Patroklos in his next outrush
at Thestor, Enops’ son, who huddled inside his chariot,
shrunk back, he had lost all his nerve, and from his hands the reins
slipped—Patroklos coming close up to him stabbed with a spear-thrust
405 at the right side of the jaw and drove it on through the teeth, then
hooked and dragged him with the spear over the rail, as a fisherman
who sits out on the jut of a rock with line and glittering
bronze hook drags a fish, who is thus doomed, out of the water.
So he hauled him, mouth open to the bright spear, out of the chariot,
410 and shoved him over on his face, and as he fell the life left him.
Next he struck Erylaos, as he swept in, with a great stone
in the middle of the head, and all the head broke into two pieces
inside the heavy helmet, and he in the dust face downward
dropped while death breaking the spirit drifted about him.
415 Afterward with Erymas, Amphoteros, and Epaltes,
Tlepolemos Damastor’s son, Echios and Pyris,
Ipheus and Euippos, and Argeas’ son Polymelos,
all these he felled to the bountiful earth in rapid succession.
But Sarpedon, when he saw his free-girt companions going
420 down underneath the hands of Menoitios’ son Patroklos,
called aloud in entreaty upon the godlike Lykians:

“Shame, you Lykians, where are you running to? You must be fierce
now,
for I myself will encounter this man, so I may find out
who this is who has so much strength and has done so much evil
425 to the Trojans, since many and brave are those whose knees he has
unstrung.”
He spoke, and sprang to the ground in all his arms from the chariot,
and on the other side Patroklos when he saw him leapt down
from his chariot. They as two hook-clawed beak-bent vultures
above a tall rock face, high-screaming, go for each other,
430 so now these two, crying aloud, encountered together.
And watching them the son of devious-devising Kronos
was pitiful, and spoke to Hera, his wife and his sister:
“Ah me, that it is destined that the dearest of men, Sarpedon,
must go down under the hands of Menoitios’ son Patroklos.
435 The heart in my breast is balanced between two ways as I ponder,
whether I should snatch him out of the sorrowful battle
and set him down still alive in the rich country of Lykia,
or beat him under at the hands of the son of Menoitios.”
In turn the lady Hera of the ox eyes answered him:
440 “Majesty, son of Kronos, what sort of thing have you spoken?
Do you wish to bring back a man who is mortal, one long since
doomed by his destiny, from ill-sounding death and release him?
Do it, then; but not all the rest of us gods shall approve you.
And put away in your thoughts this other thing I tell you;
445 if you bring Sarpedon back to his home, still living,
think how then some other one of the gods might also
wish to carry his own son out of the strong encounter;
since around the great city of Priam are fighting many
sons of the immortals. You will waken grim resentment among them.
450 No, but if he is dear to you, and your heart mourns for him,
then let him be, and let him go down in the strong encounter
underneath the hands of Patroklos, the son of Menoitios;
but after the soul and the years of his life have left him, then send
Death to carry him away, and Sleep, who is painless,
455 until they come with him to the countryside of broad Lykia

where his brothers and countrymen shall give him due burial
with tomb and gravestone. Such is the privilege of those who have
perished.”
She spoke, nor did the father of gods and men disobey her;
yet he wept tears of blood that fell to the ground, for the sake
460 of his beloved son, whom now Patroklos was presently
to kill, by generous Troy and far from the land of his fathers.
Now as these two advancing had come close to each other
there Patroklos threw first at glorious Thrasymelos
who was the strong henchman of lord Sarpedon, and struck him
465 in the depth of the lower belly, and unstrung his limbs’ strength.
Sarpedon with the second throw then missed with the shining
spear, but the spear fixed in the right shoulder of Pedasos
the horse, who screamed as he blew his life away, and went down
in shrill noise into the dust, and the life spirit flittered from him.
470 The other horses shied apart, the yoke creaked, the guide reins
were fouled together as the trace horse lay in the dust beside them;
but at this spear-famed Automedon saw what he must do
and wrenching out the long-edged sword from beside his big thigh
in a flashing stroke and without faltering cut loose the trace horse
475 and the other horses were straightened out, and pulled in the guide
reins,
and the two heroes came together in the heart-perishing battle.
Once again Sarpedon threw wide with a cast of his shining
spear, so that the pointed head overshot the left shoulder
of Patroklos; and now Patroklos made the second cast with the brazen
480 spear, and the shaft escaping his hand was not flung vainly
but struck where the beating heart is closed in the arch of the muscles.
He fell, as when an oak goes down or a white poplar,
or like a towering pine tree which in the mountains the carpenters
have hewn down with their whetted axes to make a ship-timber.
485 So he lay there felled in front of his horses and chariots
roaring, and clawed with his hands at the bloody dust; or as
a blazing and haughty bull in a huddle of shambling cattle
when a lion has come among the herd and destroys him

dies bellowing under the hooked claws of the lion, so now
490 before Patroklos the lord of the shield-armored Lykians
died raging, and called aloud to his beloved companion:
“Dear Glaukos, you are a fighter among men. Now the need comes
hardest upon you to be a spearman and a bold warrior.
Now, if you are brave, let bitter warfare be dear to you.
495 First you must go among all men who are lords of the Lykians
everywhere, and stir them up to fight for Sarpedon,
and then you yourself also must fight for me with the bronze spear.
For I shall be a thing of shame and a reproach said of you
afterward, all your days forever, if the Achaians
500 strip my armor here where I fell by the ships assembled.
But hold strongly on and stir up all the rest of our people.”
He spoke, and as he spoke death’s end closed over his nostrils
and eyes, and Patroklos stepping heel braced to chest dragged
the spear out of his body, and the midriff came away with it
505 so that he drew out with the spearhead the life of Sarpedon,
and the Myrmidons close by held in the hard-breathing horses
as they tried to bolt away, once free of their master’s chariot.
But when he heard the voice a hard sorrow came upon Glaukos,
and the heart was stirred within him, and he could not defend Sarpedon.
510 He took his arm in his hand and squeezed it, since the wound hurt him
where Teukros had hit him with an arrow shot as he swept in
on the high wall, and fended destruction from his companions.
He spoke in prayer to him who strikes from afar, Apollo:
“Hear me, my lord. You are somewhere in the rich Lykian countryside
515 or here in Troy, and wherever you are you can listen
to a man in pain, as now this pain has descended upon me.
For see, I have this strong wound on me, and my arm on both sides
is driven with sharp pains about, my blood is not able
to dry and stop running, my shoulder is aching beneath it.
520 I cannot hold my spear up steady, I cannot go forward
to fight against the enemy. And the best of men has perished,
Sarpedon, son of Zeus; who will not stand by his children.
No, but you at least, my lord, make well this strong wound;

and put the pains to sleep, give me strength, so that I may call out
525 to my companions, the Lykians, and stir them to fight on,
and I myself do battle over the fallen body.”
So he spoke in prayer, and Phoibos Apollo heard him.
At once he made the pains stop, and dried away from the hard wound
the dark running of blood, and put strength into his spirit.
530 And Glaukos knew in his heart what was done, and was happy
that the great god had listened to his prayer. And first of all
he roused toward battle all the men who were lords of the Lykians,
going everywhere among them, to fight for Sarpedon;
afterward he ranged in long strides among the Trojans,
535 by Poulydamas the son of Panthoös and brilliant Agenor,
and went to Aineias and to Hektor of the brazen helmet
and stood near them and addressed them in winged words: “Hektor,
now you have utterly forgotten your armed companions
who for your sake, far from their friends and the land of their fathers,
540 are wearing their lives away, and you will do nothing to help them.
Sarpedon has fallen, the lord of the shield-armored Lykians,
who defended Lykia in his strength and the right of his justice.
Now brazen Ares has struck him down by the spear of Patroklos.
Then, friends, stand beside me, let the thought be shame in your spirit
545 that they might strip away his arms, and dishonor his body,
these Myrmidons, in anger for all the Danaäns perished,
those whom we Lykians have killed with the spear by the swift ships.”
He spoke, and the Trojans were taken head to heel with a sorrow
untakeable, not to be endured, since he was their city’s
550 stay, always, though he was an outlander, and many people
came with him, but he was the best of them all in battle
always. They went straight for the Danaäns, raging, and Hektor
led them, in anger for Sarpedon. Meanwhile the Achaians
roused to the savage heart of Patroklos, the son of Menoitios.
555 First he spoke to the Aiantes, who were burning for battle already:
“Aiantes, now your desire must be to defend yourselves, and be
such as you were among men before, or even more valiant.
The man is fallen who first scaled the wall of the Achaians,
Sarpedon. If only we could win and dishonor his body

560 and strip the armor from his shoulders, and kill with the pitiless
bronze some one of his companions who fight to defend him.”
He spoke, and they likewise grew furious in their defense,
and when they on either side had made massive their battalions,
Trojans and Lykians, and Myrmidons and Achaians,
565 they clashed together in battle over the perished body
howling terribly, with a high crash of the men in their armor,
while Zeus swept ghastly night far over the strong encounter
that over his dear son might be deadly work in the fighting.
First the Trojans shouldered back the glancing-eyed Achaians
570 when a man, and not the worst of the Myrmidons, was struck down,
son of high-hearted Agakles, Epeigeus the brilliant.
He was one who was lord before in strong-founded Boudeion,
but now, since he had happened to kill his high-born cousin,
had come suppliant to Peleus and to Thetis the silver-footed,
575 and these sent him to follow Achilleus, who broke men in battle,
to Ilion of the horses and the battle against the Trojans.
As he caught at a dead man glorious Hektor hit him
with a stone in the head, and all the head broke into two pieces
inside the heavy helmet, and he in the dust face downward
580 dropped, while death breaking the spirit drifted about him.
And the sorrow took hold of Patroklos for his fallen companion.
He steered his way through the ranks of the front fighters, like a flying
hawk who scatters into flight the daws and the starlings.
So straight for the Lykians, O lord of horses, Patroklos,
585 you swept, and for the Trojans, heart angered for your companion.
Now he struck Sthenelaos, beloved son of Ithaimenes,
in the neck with a stone, and broke the tendons loose from about it.
The champions of Troy gave back then, and glorious Hektor.
As far as goes the driving cast of a slender javelin
590 which a man throws making trial of his strength, either in a contest
or else in battle, under the heart-breaking hostilities,
so far the Trojans gave way with the Achaians pushing them.
But Glaukos was first, lord of the shield-armored Lykians,
to turn again, and killed Bathykles the great-hearted, beloved

595 son of Chalkon, who had dwelled in his home in Hellas
conspicuous for wealth and success among all the Myrmidons.
It was he whom Glaukos stabbed in the middle of the chest, turning
suddenly back with his spear as he overtook him. He fell,
thunderously, and the closing sorrow came over the Achaians
600 as the great man went down, but the Trojans were gladdened greatly
as the great man went down, but the Trojans were gladdened greatly
and came and stood in a pack about him, nor did the Achaians
let go of their fighting strength, but steered their fury straight at them.
And there Meriones cut down a chief man of the Trojans,
Laogonos, bold son of Onetor, who was Idaian,
605 Zeus’ priest, and who was honored in his countryside as a god is.
Meriones struck him by jaw and ear, and at once the life spirit
fled from his limbs, and the hateful darkness closed in about him.
But Aineias threw his bronze spear at Meriones, hoping
to hit him as he came forward under his shield’s covering,
610 but Meriones with his eyes straight on him avoided the bronze spear.
For he bent forward, and behind his back the long spearshaft
was driven into the ground so that the butt end was shaken
on the spear. Then and there Ares the huge took the force from it
[so that the vibrant shaft of Aineias was driven groundward
615 since it had been thrown in a vain cast from his big hand].
But Aineias was angered in his spirit, and called out to him:
“Meriones, though you are a dancer my spear might have stopped you
now and for all time, if only I could have hit you.”

Then in turn Meriones the spear-famed answered him:
620 “Aineias, strong fighter though you are, it would be hard for you
to quench the strength of every man who might come against you
and defend himself, since you also are made as a mortal.
But if I could throw and hit you with the sharp bronze in the middle,
then strong as you are and confident in your hands’ work, you might
625 give the glory to me, and your soul to Hades of the horses.”
He spoke, but the fighting son of Menoitios reprimanded him:

“Meriones, when you are a brave fighter, why say such things?—See,
dear friend, the Trojans will not give back from the body
for hard words spoken. Sooner the ground will cover them. Warfare’s
630 finality lies in the work of hands, that of words in counsel.
It is not for us now to pile up talk, but to fight in battle.”
He spoke, and led the way, and the other followed, a mortal
like a god. As the tumult goes up from men who are cutting
timber in the mountain valleys, and the sound is heard from far off,
635 such was the dull crashing that rose from earth of the wide ways,
from the bronze shields, the skins and the strong-covering ox-hides
as the swords and leaf-headed spears stabbed against them. No longer
could a man, even a knowing one, have made out the godlike
Sarpedon, since he was piled from head to ends of feet under
640 a mass of weapons, the blood and the dust, while others about him
kept forever swarming over his dead body, as flies
through a sheepfold thunder about the pails overspilling
milk, in the season of spring when the milk splashes in the buckets.
So they swarmed over the dead man, nor did Zeus ever
645 turn the glaring of his eyes from the strong encounter,
but kept gazing forever upon them, in spirit reflective,
and pondered hard over many ways for the death of Patroklos;
whether this was now the time, in this strong encounter,
when there over godlike Sarpedon glorious Hektor
650 should kill him with the bronze, and strip the armor away from his
shoulders,
or whether to increase the steep work of fighting for more men.
In the division of his heart this way seemed best to him,
for the strong henchman of Achilleus, the son of Peleus,
once again to push the Trojans and bronze-helmed Hektor
655 back on their city, and tear the life from many. In Hektor
first of all he put a temper that was without strength.
He climbed to his chariot and turned to flight, and called to the other
Trojans to run, for he saw the way of Zeus’ sacred balance.
Nor did the powerful Lykians stand now, but were all scattered
660 to flight, when they had seen their king with a spear in his heart, lying

under the pile of dead men, since many others had fallen
above him, once Zeus had strained fast the powerful conflict.
But the Achaians took from Sarpedon’s shoulders the armor
glaring and brazen, and this the warlike son of Menoitios
665 gave to his companions to carry back to the hollow ships.
And now Zeus who gathers the clouds spoke a word to Apollo:
“Go if you will, beloved Phoibos, and rescue Sarpedon
from under the weapons, wash the dark suffusion of blood from him,
then carry him far away and wash him in a running river,
670 anoint him in ambrosia, put ambrosial clothing upon him;
then give him into the charge of swift messengers to carry him,
of Sleep and Death, who are twin brothers, and these two shall lay him
down presently within the rich countryside of broad Lykia
where his brothers and countrymen shall give him due burial
675 with tomb and gravestone. Such is the privilege of those who have
perished.”
He spoke so, and Apollo, not disregarding his father,
went down along the mountains of Ida, into the grim fight,
and lifting brilliant Sarpedon out from under the weapons
carried him far away, and washed him in a running river,
680 and anointed him in ambrosia, put ambrosial clothing upon him,
then gave him into the charge of swift messengers to carry him,
of Sleep and Death, who are twin brothers, and these two presently
laid him down within the rich countryside of broad Lykia.
But Patroklos, with a shout to Automedon and his horses,
685 went after Trojans and Lykians in a huge blind fury.
Besotted: had he only kept the command of Peleiades
he might have got clear away from the evil spirit of black death.
But always the mind of Zeus is a stronger thing than a man’s mind.
He terrifies even the warlike man, he takes away victory
690 lightly, when he himself has driven a man into battle
as now he drove on the fury in the heart of Patroklos.
Then who was it you slaughtered first, who was the last one,

Patroklos, as the gods called you to your death? Adrestos
first, and after him Autonoös and Echeklos,
695 Perimos, son of Megas, and Epistor, and Melanippos,
and after these Elasos, and Moulios, and Pylartes.
These he killed, while each man of the rest was bent on escaping.
There the sons of the Achaians might have taken gate-towering Ilion
under the hands of Patroklos, who raged with the spear far before them,
700 had not Phoibos Apollo taken his stand on the strong-built
tower, with thoughts of death for him, but help for the Trojans.
Three times Patroklos tried to mount the angle of the towering
wall, and three times Phoibos Apollo battered him backward
with the immortal hands beating back the bright shield. As Patroklos
705 for the fourth time, like something more than a man, came at him
he called aloud, and spoke winged words in the voice of danger:
“Give way, illustrious Patroklos: it is not destined
that the city of the proud Trojans shall fall before your spear
nor even at the hand of Achilleus, who is far better than you are.”
710 He spoke, and Patroklos gave ground before him a great way,
avoiding the anger of him who strikes from afar, Apollo.
But Hektor inside the Skaian Gates held his single-foot horses,
and wondered whether to drive back into the carnage, and fight there,
or call aloud to his people to rally inside the wall. Thus
715 as he was pondering Phoibos Apollo came and stood by him,
assuming the likeness of a man, a young and a strong one,
Asios, who was uncle to Hektor, breaker of horses,
since he was brother of Hekabē, and the son of Dymas,
and had made his home in Phrygia by the stream of Sangarios.
720 In the likeness of this man Zeus’ son Apollo spoke to him:
“Hektor, why have you stopped fighting? You should not do it.
If I were as much stronger than you as now I am weaker!
So might you, in this evil way, hold back from the fighting.
But come! Hold straight against Patroklos your strong-footed horses.
725 You might be able to kill him. Apollo might give you such glory.”
He spoke, and went once more, a divinity, into the mortals’

struggle, while glorious Hektor called to wise Kebriones
to lash their horses into the fighting. Meanwhile Apollo
went down into the battle, and launched a deadly confusion
730 upon the Argives, and gave glory to the Trojans and Hektor.
Now Hektor let the rest of the Danaäns be, and he would not
kill them, but drove his strong-footed horses straight for Patroklos.
On the other side Patroklos sprang to the ground from his chariot
holding his spear in his left hand. In the other he caught up
735 a stone, jagged and shining, in the hold of his hand, and threw it,
leaning into the throw, nor fell short of the man he aimed at
nor threw vainly, but hit the charioteer of Hektor,
Kebriones, a bastard son of glorious Priam,
as he held the reins on his horses. The sharp stone hit him in the
forehead
740 and smashed both brows in on each other, nor could the bone hold
the rock, but his eyes fell out into the dust before him
there at his feet, so that he vaulted to earth like a diver
from the carefully wrought chariot, and the life left his bones. Now
you spoke in bitter mockery over him, rider Patroklos:
745 “See now, what a light man this is, how agile an acrobat.
If only he were somewhere on the sea, where the fish swarm,
he could fill the hunger of many men, by diving for oysters;
he could go overboard from a boat even in rough weather
the way he somersaults so light to the ground from his chariot
750 now. So, to be sure, in Troy also they have their acrobats.”
He spoke so, and strode against the hero Kebriones
with the spring of a lion, who as he ravages the pastures
has been hit in the chest, and his own courage destroys him.
So in your fury you pounced, Patroklos, above Kebriones.
755 On the other side Hektor sprang to the ground from his chariot,
and the two fought it out over Kebriones, like lions
who in the high places of a mountain, both in huge courage
and both hungry, fight together over a killed deer.
So above Kebriones these two, urgent for battle,
760 Patroklos, son of Menoitios, and glorious Hektor,
were straining with the pitiless bronze to tear at each other;

since Hektor had caught him by the head, and would not let go of him,
and Patroklos had his foot on the other side, while the other
Trojans and Danaäns drove together the strength of their onset.

765

As east wind and south wind fight it out with each other
in the valleys of the mountains to shake the deep forest timber,
oak tree and ash and the cornel with the delicate bark; these
whip their wide-reaching branches against one another
in inhuman noise, and the crash goes up from the splintering timber;
770 so Trojans and Achaians springing against one another
cut men down, nor did either side think of disastrous panic,
and many sharp spears were driven home about Kebriones
and many feathered arrows sprung from the bowstrings, many
great throwing stones pounded against the shields, as they fought on
775 hard over his body, as he in the turning dust lay
mightily in his might, his horsemanship all forgotten.
So long as the sun was climbing still to the middle heaven,
so long the thrown weapons of both took hold, and men dropped under
them;
but when the sun had gone to the time for unyoking of cattle,
780 then beyond their very destiny the Achaians were stronger
and dragged the hero Kebriones from under the weapons
and the clamor of the Trojans, and stripped the armor from his
shoulders.
And Patroklos charged with evil intention in on the Trojans.
Three times he charged in with the force of the running war god,
785 screaming a terrible cry, and three times he cut down nine men;
but as for the fourth time he swept in, like something greater
than human, there, Patroklos, the end of your life was shown forth,
since Phoibos came against you there in the strong encounter
dangerously, nor did Patroklos see him as he moved through
790 the battle, and shrouded in a deep mist came in against him
and stood behind him, and struck his back and his broad shoulders
with a flat stroke of the hand so that his eyes spun. Phoibos

Apollo now struck away from his head the helmet
four-horned and hollow-eyed, and under the feet of the horses
795 it rolled clattering, and the plumes above it were defiled
by blood and dust. Before this time it had not been permitted
to defile in the dust this great helmet crested in horse-hair;
rather it guarded the head and the gracious brow of a godlike
man, Achilleus; but now Zeus gave it over to Hektor
800 to wear on his head, Hektor whose own death was close to him.
And in his hands was splintered all the huge, great, heavy,
iron-shod, far-shadowing spear, and away from his shoulders
dropped to the ground the shield with its shield sling and its tassels.
The lord Apollo, son of Zeus, broke the corselet upon him.
805 Disaster caught his wits, and his shining body went nerveless.
He stood stupidly, and from close behind his back a Dardanian
man hit him between the shoulders with a sharp javelin:
Euphorbos, son of Panthoös, who surpassed all men of his own age
with the throwing spear, and in horsemanship and the speed of his feet.
He
810 had already brought down twenty men from their horses
since first coming, with his chariot and his learning in warfare.
He first hit you with a thrown spear, O rider Patroklos,
nor broke you, but ran away again, snatching out the ash spear
from your body, and lost himself in the crowd, not enduring
815 to face Patroklos, naked as he was, in close combat.

Now Patroklos, broken by the spear and the god’s blow, tried
to shun death and shrink back into the swarm of his own companions.
But Hektor, when he saw high-hearted Patroklos trying
to get away, saw how he was wounded with the sharp javelin,
820 came close against him across the ranks, and with the spear stabbed
him
in the depth of the belly and drove the bronze clean through. He fell,
thunderously, to the horror of all the Achaian people.
As a lion overpowers a weariless boar in wild combat

as the two fight in their pride on the high places of a mountain
825 over a little spring of water, both wanting to drink there,
and the lion beats him down by force as he fights for his breath, so
Hektor, Priam’s son, with a close spear-stroke stripped the life
from the fighting son of Menoitios, who had killed so many,
and stood above him, and spoke aloud the winged words of triumph:
830 “Patroklos, you thought perhaps of devastating our city,
of stripping from the Trojan women the day of their liberty
and dragging them off in ships to the beloved land of your fathers.
Fool! when in front of them the running horses of Hektor
strained with their swift feet into the fighting, and I with my own spear
835 am conspicuous among the fighting Trojans, I who beat from them
the day of necessity. For you, here the vultures shall eat you.
Wretch! Achilleus, great as he was, could do nothing to help you.
When he stayed behind, and you went, he must have said much to you:
‘Patroklos, lord of horses, see that you do not come back to me
840 and the hollow ships, until you have torn in blood the tunic
of manslaughtering Hektor about his chest.’ In some such
manner he spoke to you, and persuaded the fool’s heart in you.”
And now, dying, you answered him, O rider Patroklos:
“Now is your time for big words, Hektor. Yours is the victory
845 given by Kronos’ son, Zeus, and Apollo, who have subdued me
easily, since they themselves stripped the arms from my shoulders.
Even though twenty such as you had come in against me,
they would all have been broken beneath my spear, and have perished.
No, deadly destiny, with the son of Leto, has killed me,
850 and of men it was Euphorbos; you are only my third slayer.
And put away in your heart this other thing that I tell you.
You yourself are not one who shall live long, but now already
death and powerful destiny are standing beside you,
to go down under the hands of Aiakos’ great son, Achilleus.”

855

He spoke, and as he spoke the end of death closed in upon him,
and the soul fluttering free of his limbs went down into Death’s house

mourning her destiny, leaving youth and manhood behind her.
Now though he was a dead man glorious Hektor spoke to him:
“Patroklos, what is this prophecy of my headlong destruction?
860 Who knows if even Achilleus, son of lovely-haired Thetis,
might before this be struck by my spear, and his own life perish?”
He spoke, and setting his heel upon him wrenched out the bronze
spear
from the wound, then spurned him away on his back from the spear.
Thereafter
armed with the spear he went on, aiming a cast at Automedon,
865 the godlike henchman for the swift-footed son of Aiakos,
with the spear as he was carried away by those swift and immortal
horses the gods had given as shining gifts to Peleus.

BOOK SEVENTEEN

5

10

15

20

25

As Patroklos went down before the Trojans in the hard fighting
he was not unseen by Atreus’ son, warlike Menelaos,
who stalked through the ranks of the champions, helmed in the bright
bronze,
and bestrode the body, as over a first-born calf the mother
cow stands lowing, she who has known no children before this.
So Menelaos of the fair hair stood over Patroklos
and held the spear and the perfect circle of his shield before him,
raging to cut down any man who might come forth against him.
Nor did the fall of blameless Patroklos pass unattended
by Panthoös’ son of the strong ash spear, Euphorbos, who standing
close to face him spoke a word to warlike Menelaos:
“Son of Atreus, Menelaos, illustrious, leader of armies:
give way, let the bloody spoils be, get back from this body,
since before me no one of the Trojans, or renowned companions,
struck Patroklos down with the spear in the strong encounter.
Thereby let me win this great glory among the Trojans
before I hit you and strip the sweetness of life away from you.”
Deeply stirred, Menelaos of the fair hair answered him:
“Father Zeus, it is not well for the proud man to glory.
Neither the fury of the leopard is such, not such is the lion’s,
nor the fury of the devastating wild boar, within whose breast
the spirit is biggest and vaunts in the pride of his strength, is so great
as goes the pride in these sons of Panthoös of the strong ash spear.
Yet even the strength of Hyperenor, breaker of horses,
had no joy of his youth when he stood against me and taunted me
and said that among all the Danaäns I was the weakest
in battle. Yet I think that his feet shall no more carry him

30

35

40

45

50

55

60

back, to pleasure his beloved wife and his honored parents.
So I think I can break your strength as well, if you only
stand against me. No, but I myself tell you to get back
into the multitude, not stand to face me, before you
take some harm. Once a thing has been done, the fool sees it.”
He spoke so, but did not persuade Euphorbos, who answered:
“Then, lordly Menelaos, you must now pay the penalty
for my brother, whom you killed, and boast that you did it,
and made his wife a widow in the depth of a young bride chamber
and left to his parents the curse of lamentation and sorrow.
Yet I might stop the mourning of these unhappy people
if I could carry back to them your head, and your armor,
and toss them into Panthoös’ hands, and to Phrontis the lovely.
No, this struggle shall not go long untested between us
nor yet unfought, whether it prove our strength or our terror.”
He spoke, and stabbed Menelaos’ shield in its perfect circle,
nor did the bronze break its way through, but the spearhead bent back
in the strong shield. And after him Atreus’ son, Menelaos,
made his prayer to father Zeus and lunged with the bronze spear
and as he was drawing back caught him in the pit of the gullet
and leaned in on the stroke in the confidence of his strong hand,
and clean through the soft part of the neck the spearpoint was driven.
He fell, thunderously, and his armor clattered upon him,
and his hair, lovely as the Graces, was splattered with blood, those
braided locks caught waspwise in gold and silver. As some
slip of an olive tree strong-growing that a man raises
in a lonely place, and drenched it with generous water, so that
it blossoms into beauty, and the blasts of winds from all quarters
tremble it, and it bursts into pale blossoming. But then
a wind suddenly in a great tempest descending upon it
wrenches it out of its stand and lays it at length on the ground; such
was Euphorbos of the strong ash spear, the son of Panthoös,
whom Menelaos Atreides killed, and was stripping his armor.
As when in the confidence of his strength some lion
hill-reared snatches the finest cow in a herd as it pastures;

65

70

75

80

first the lion breaks her neck caught fast in the strong teeth,
then gulps down the blood and all the guts that are inward
savagely, as the dogs and the herdsmen raise a commotion
loudly about him, but from a distance, and are not willing
to go in and face him, since the hard green fear has hold of them;
so no heart in the breast of any Trojan had courage
to go in and face glorious Menelaos. Then easily
the son of Atreus might have taken the glorious armor
from Panthoös’ son, only Phoibos Apollo begrudged him
and stirred up Hektor, a match for the running war god, against him
in semblance of a man, the leader of the Kikones,
Mentes, and spoke aloud to him, and addressed him in winged words:
“While you, Hektor, run after what can never be captured,
the horses of valiant Aiakides; they are difficult horses
for mortal man to manage, or even to ride behind them
for all except Achilleus, who was born of an immortal mother;
meanwhile Menelaos, the warlike son of Atreus,
stands over Patroklos and has killed the best man of the Trojans,
Euphorbos, Panthoös’ son, and stopped his furious valor.”

So he spoke, and went back, a god, to the mortals’ struggle.
But bitter sorrow closed over Hektor’s heart in its darkness.
He looked about then across the ranks, and at once was aware
85 of the two men, one stripping the glorious armor, the other
sprawled on the ground, and blood running from the gash of the spearthrust.
He stalked through the ranks of the champions helmed in the bright
bronze
with a shrill scream, and looking like the flame of Hephaistos,
weariless. Nor did Atreus’ son fail to hear the sharp cry.
90 Deeply troubled, he spoke to his own great-hearted spirit:
Ah me; if I abandon here the magnificent armor,
and Patroklos, who has fallen here for the sake of my honor,
shall not some one of the Danaäns, seeing it, hold it against me?
Yet if I fight, alone as I am, the Trojans and Hektor
95 for shame, shall they not close in, many against one, about me?

Hektor of the shining helm leads all of the Trojans
here. Then why does my own heart within me debate this?
When a man, in the face of divinity, would fight with another
whom some god honors, the big disaster rolls sudden upon him.
100 Therefore, let no Danaän seeing it hold it against me
if I give way before Hektor, who fights from God. Yet if somewhere
I could only get some word of Aias of the great war cry,
we two might somehow go, and keep our spirit of battle
even in the face of divinity, if we might win the body
105 for Peleïd Achilleus. It would be our best among evils.”
Now as he was pondering this in his heart and his spirit
meanwhile the ranks of the Trojans came on, and Hektor led them;
and Menelaos backed away from them and left the dead man,
but kept turning on his way like some great bearded lion
110 when dogs and men drive him off from a steading with weapons
and shouts, and in the breast of the lion the strong heart of valor
freezes, and he goes reluctant away from the fenced ground.
So fair-haired Menelaos moved from Patroklos, but turning
stood fast when he had got back to the swarm of his own companions,
115 and looked all about for huge Aias, the son of Telamon,
and saw soon where he was, at the left of the entire battle
encouraging his companions and urging them into the fighting,
since Phoibos Apollo had smitten them all with unearthly terror.
He went on the run, and presently stood beside him and spoke to him:
120 “This way, Aias, we must make for fallen Patroklos
to try if we can carry back to Achilleus the body
which is naked; Hektor of the shining helm has taken his armor.”
So he spoke, and stirred the spirit in valiant Aias
who strode among the champions, fair-haired Menelaos with him.
125 But Hektor, when he had stripped from Patroklos the glorious armor,
dragged at him, meaning to cut his head from his shoulders with the
sharp bronze,
to haul off the body and give it to the dogs of Troy; but meanwhile
Aias came near him, carrying like a wall his shield,
and Hektor drew back to the company of his own companions

130 and sprang to his chariot, but handed over the beautiful armor
to the Trojans, to take back to the city and to be his great glory.
Now Aias covering the son of Menoitios under his broad shield
stood fast, like a lion over his young, when the lion
is leading his little ones along, and men who are hunting
135 come upon them in the forest. He stands in the pride of his great
strength
hooding his eyes under the cover of down-drawn eyelids.
Such was Aias as he bestrode the hero Patroklos,
while on the other side Atreus’ son, warlike Menelaos,
stood fast, feeding still bigger the great sorrow within him.

140

But Glaukos, lord of the Lykian men, the son of Hippolochos,
looked at Hektor, scowling, and laid a harsh word upon him:
“Hektor, splendid to look at, you come far short in your fighting.
That fame of yours, high as it is, belongs to a runner.
Take thought now how to hold fast your town, your citadel
145 by yourself, with those your people who were born in Ilion;
since no Lykian will go forth now to fight with the Danaäns
for the sake of your city, since after all we got no gratitude
for our everlasting hard struggle against your enemies.
How then, O hard-hearted, shall you save a worse man in all your
150 company, when you have abandoned Sarpedon, your guest-friend
and own companion, to be the spoil and prey of the Argives,
who was of so much use to you, yourself and your city
while he lived? Now you have not the spirit to keep the dogs from him.
Therefore now, if any of the Lykian men will obey me,
155 we are going home, and the headlong destruction of Troy shall be
manifest.
For if the Trojans had any fighting strength that were daring
and unshaken, such as comes on men who, for the sake of their country,
have made the hard hateful work come between them and their
enemies,
we could quickly get the body of Patroklos inside Ilion.

160 If, dead man though he be, he could be brought into the great city
of lord Priam, if we could tear him out of the fighting,
the Argives must at once give up the beautiful armor
of Sarpedon, and we could carry his body inside Ilion.
Such is the man whose henchman is killed. He is far the greatest
165 of the Argives by the ships, and his men fight hard at close quarters.
No, but you could not bring yourself to stand up against Aias
of the great heart, nor to look at his eyes in the clamor of fighting
men, nor attack him direct, since he is far better than you are.”
Looking darkly at him tall Hektor of the shining helm answered:
170 “Glaukos, why did a man like you speak this word of annoyance?
I am surprised. I thought that for wits you surpassed all others
of those who dwell in Lykia where the soil is generous; and yet
now I utterly despise your heart for the thing you have spoken
when you said I cannot stand in the face of gigantic Aias.
175 I am not one who shudders at attack and the thunder of horses.
But always the mind of Zeus is a stronger thing than a man’s mind.
He terrifies even the warlike man, he takes away victory
lightly, when he himself has driven a man into battle.
Come here, friend, and watch me at work; learn, standing beside me,
180 whether I shall be a coward all day, as you proclaim me,
or whether I stop some Danaän, for all of his fury,
from his fighting strength and from the defense of fallen Patroklos.”
So speaking he called afar in a great voice to the Trojans:
“Trojans, Lykians, Dardanians who fight at close quarters,
185 be men now, dear friends, remember your furious valor
while I am putting on the beautiful armor of blameless
Achilleus, which I stripped from Patroklos the strong when I killed
him.”
So spoke Hektor of the shining helm, and departed
from the hateful battle, and running caught up with his companions
190 very soon, since he went on quick feet, and they had not gone far
carrying the glorious armor of Peleus’ son toward the city.
He stood apart from the sorrowful fighting, and changed his armor,
and gave what he had worn to the fighting Trojans to carry

to sacred Ilion, and himself put on that armor immortal
195 of Peleïd Achilleus, which the Uranian gods had given
to his loved father; and he in turn grown old had given it
to his son; but a son who never grew old in his father’s armor.
When Zeus who gathers the clouds saw him, apart from the others
arming himself in the battle gear of godlike Peleïdes,
200 he stirred his head and spoke to his own spirit: “Ah, poor wretch!
There is no thought of death in your mind now, and yet death stands
close beside you as you put on the immortal armor
of a surpassing man. There are others who tremble before him.
Now you have killed this man’s dear friend, who was strong and gentle,
205 and taken the armor, as you should not have done, from his shoulders
and head. Still for the present I will invest you with great strength
to make up for it that you will not come home out of the fighting,
nor Andromachē take from your hands the glorious arms of Achilleus.”
He spoke, the son of Kronos, and nodded his head with the dark
brows.
210 The armor was fitted to Hektor’s skin, and Ares the dangerous
war god entered him, so that the inward body was packed full
of force and fighting strength. He went onward calling in a great voice
to his renowned companions in arms, and figured before them
flaming in the battle gear of great-hearted Peleion.
215 “He ranged their ranks, and spoke a word to encourage each captain,
to Mesthles and Glaukos, to Thersilochos and Medon,
Deisenor and Hippothoös and Asteropaios,
to Phorkys and Chromios and the bird interpreter Ennomos,
and stirring all of these forward called to them in winged words:
220 “Hear me, you numberless hordes of companions who live at our
borders.
It was not for any desire nor need of a multitude
that man by man I gathered you to come here from your cities,
but so that you might have good will to defend the innocent
children of the Trojans, and their wives, from the fighting Achaians.
225 With such a purpose I wear out my own people for presents
and food, wherewith I make strong the spirit within each one of you.
Therefore a man must now turn his face straight forward, and perish

or survive. This is the sweet invitation of battle.
That man of you who drags Patroklos, dead as he is, back
230 among Trojans, breakers of horses, and Aias gives way before him,
I will give him half the spoils for his portion, and keep half
for myself, and his glory shall be as great as mine is.”
So he spoke, and they lifted their spears and went straight for the
Danaäns
who felt their weight, and inside each man the spirit was hopeful
235 to get the body away from Telamonian Aias.
Fools! since over the dead man he tore the life out of many.
Then Aias himself spoke to Menelaos of the great war cry:
“Illustrious Menelaos, dear friend, I no longer have hope
that even you and I can win back out of the fighting.
240 My fear is not so much for the dead body of Patroklos
who presently must glut the dogs and the birds of Troy, so much
as I fear for my own head, my life, and what may befall it,
and for yours, since this cloud of war is darkened on all things,
this Hektor, while for you and me sheer death is emerging.
245 Come then, call the great men of the Danaäns, if one might hear you.”
He spoke, and Menelaos of the great war cry obeyed him.
He lifted his voice and called in a piercing cry to the Danaäns:
“Friends, O leaders and men of counsel among the Argives,
you that beside Agamemnon and Menelaos, the two sons
250 of Atreus, drink the community’s wine and give, each man, his orders
to the people; and from Zeus the respect and honor attend you.
It is hard for me to discriminate among you each man
who is a leader, so big is the bitter fight that has blazed up.
Then let a man come of his own accord, think it shameful
255 that Patroklos be given to the dogs of Troy to delight them.”
He spoke, and swift Aias son of Oïleus was sharp to hear him
and was first to come running along the battle, and join him,
and after him Idomeneus, and Idomeneus’ companion
Meriones, a match for the murderous lord of battles.
260 But what man could tell forth from his heart the names of the others,
all who after these waked the war strength of the Achaians?

The Trojans came down on them in a pack, and Hektor led them.
As when at the outpouring place of a rain-glutted river
the huge surf of the sea roars against the current, out-jutting
265 beaches thunder aloud to the backwash of the salt water,
with such a bellow the Trojans came on, but now the Achaians
stood fast about the son of Menoitios, in a single courage
and fenced beneath their bronze-armored shields, while the son of
Kronos
drifted across the glitter of their helmets a deepening
270 mist; since before this time he had not hated Menoitios’
son, while he lived yet and was Achilleus’ companion,
and loathed now that he should become the spoil of the hated
Trojans’ dogs, and stirred his companions on to defend him.
First the Trojans shouldered back the glancing-eyed Achaians,
275 who abandoned the body and ran for terror, nor did the high-hearted
Trojans take any with their spears, for all of their striving,
but dragged at the dead man, only the Achaians were not long destined
to fail him, since they were pulled around in sudden speed
by Aias, who for his beauty and the work of his hands surpassed
280 all other Danaäns, after the blameless son of Peleus.
He steered through the front fighters in pride of strength like a savage
wild boar, who among the mountains easily scatters
the dogs and strong young men when he turns at bay in the valley.
So now the son of haughty Telamon, glorious Aias,
285 turned to charge and easily scatter the Trojan battalions,
who had taken their stand bestriding Patroklos, in high hope
of dragging him off to their own city, and so winning honor.
Indeed, Hippothoös, glorious son of Pelasgian Lethos,
was trying to drag him by the foot through the strong encounter
290 by fastening the sling of his shield round the ankle tendons
for the favor of Hektor and the Trojans, but the sudden evil
came to him, and none for all their desire could defend him.
The son of Telamon, sweeping in through the mass of the fighters,
struck him at close quarters through the brazen cheeks of his helmet
295 and the helm crested with horse-hair was riven about the spearhead
to the impact of the huge spear and the weight of the hand behind it

and the brain ran from the wound along the spear by the eye-hole,
bleeding. There his strength was washed away, and from his hands
he let fall to the ground the foot of great-hearted Patroklos
300 to lie there, and himself collapsed prone over the dead man
far away from generous Larissa, and he could not
render again the care of his dear parents; he was short-lived,
beaten down beneath the spear of high-hearted Aias.
Again Hektor threw at Aias with the shining javelin,
305 but Aias with his eyes straight on him avoided the bronze spear
by a little, and Hektor struck Schedios, the son of high-hearted
Iphitos and far the best of the Phokians, one who lived
in his home in famous Panopeus and was lord over many people.
He struck him fair beneath the collar-bone, and the pointed
310 bronze head tore clean through and came out by the base of the
shoulder.
He fell, thunderously, and his armor clattered upon him.
But Aias in turn cut at Phorkys, the wise son of Phainops,
in the middle of the belly as he stood over fallen Hippothoös,
and broke the hollow of the corselet, so that the entrails spurted
315 from the bronze, and he went down clawing the dust in his fingers.
The champions of Troy gave back then, and glorious Hektor,
and the Argives gave a great cry and dragged back the bodies
of Hippothoös and Phorkys, and eased the armor from their shoulders.
Then, once more, might the Trojans have climbed back into Ilion’s
320 wall, subdued by terror before the warlike Achaians,
and the Argives, even beyond Zeus’ destiny, might have won glory
by their own force and strength, had not Apollo in person
stirred on Aineias; he had assumed the form of the herald
Periphas, Epytos’ son, growing old in his herald’s office
325 by Aineias’ aged father, and a man whose thoughts were of kindness.
In the likeness of this man Zeus’ son Apollo spoke to him:
“Aineias, how could you be the man to defend sheer Ilion
even against a god’s will, as I have seen other men do it
in the confidence of their own force and strength, their own manhood
330 and their own numbers, though they had too few people for it?
But now Zeus wishes the victory far rather for our side

than the Danaäns’, only yourselves keep blenching and will not fight
them.”
So he spoke, but Aineias knew far-striking Apollo
as he looked him straight in the face, and called in a great voice to
Hektor:
335 “Hektor, and you other lords of the Trojans and their companions,
here is a shameful thing! We are climbing back into Ilion’s
wall, subdued by terror before the warlike Achaians.
Yet see, some one of the gods is standing beside me, and tells me
that Zeus the supreme counselor lends his weight to our fighting.
340 Therefore we must go straight for the Danaäns, so that they may not
carry thus easily back to their ships the fallen Patroklos.”
He spoke, and with a long leap stood far before the front fighters,
and the Trojans turned and held their ground against the Achaians.
And now Aineias killed Leiokritos, with a spear-thrust,
345 the son of Arisbas and noble companion of Lykomedes;
but as he fell the warrior Lykomedes pitied him,
and stood close in, and made a cast with the shining javelin
and struck Apisaon, son of Hippasos, shepherd of the people,
in the liver under the midriff, and the strength of his knees was broken.
350 He was one who had come from Paionia of the rich soil
and was best of her men in fighting next to Asteropaios.
As this man fell, warlike Asteropaios pitied him
and he in turn drove forward eager to fight with the Danaäns,
but was not able to do it, for they, standing about Patroklos,
355 fenced him behind their shields on all sides, and held their spears outthrust.
For Aias ranged their whole extent with his numerous orders,
and would not let any man give back from the body, nor let one
go out and fight by himself far in front of the other Achaians,
but made them stand hard and fast about him and fight at close
quarters.
360 Such were the orders of gigantic Aias. The ground ran
with red blood, the dead men dropped one after another
from the ranks alike of Trojans and their mighty companions
and Danaäns also, since these fought not without bloodletting,

but far fewer of them went down, since they ever remembered
365 always to stand massed and beat sudden death from each other.

So they fought on in the likeness of fire, nor would you have thought
the sun was still secure in his place in the sky, nor the moon, since
the mist was closed over all that part of the fight where the bravest
stood about Patroklos, the fallen son of Menoitios.
370 Now elsewhere the rest of the Trojans and strong-greaved Achaians
fought naturally in the bright air, with the sun’s sharp glitter
everywhere about them, no cloud was showing anywhere
on earth nor on the mountains. They fought their battle by intervals
standing each well off at a distance, avoiding the painful
375 shots from the other side; but they in the middle were suffering
distress in the mist and the fighting, with the cruel bronze wearing
them.
These men were the bravest, but there were two men of glory,
Thrasymedes and Antilochos, who had not yet heard
how Patroklos the blameless had been killed, but still thought
380 he was alive and fighting in the first shock with the Trojans.
But these two, watching against death or flight in their company,
fought their separate battle, since such was their order from Nestor
as he was urging them forth from the black ships into the fighting.
So for these daylong the hard bitterness of the wearing
385 battle rose. With the ever-relentless sweat and the weariness
knees, legs, and feet that supported from underneath each fighter,
their hands and eyes also were running wet as they fought on
over the brave henchman of swift-footed Aiakides.
As when a man gives the hide of a great ox, a bullock,
390 drenched first deep in fat, to all his people to stretch out;
the people take it from him and stand in a circle about it
and pull, and presently the moisture goes and the fat sinks
in, with so many pulling, and the bull’s hide is stretched out level;
so the men of both sides in a cramped space tugged at the body
395 in both directions; and the hearts of the Trojans were hopeful

to drag him away to Ilion, those of the Achaians
to get him back to the hollow ships. And about him a savage
struggle arose. Not Ares who rallies men, not Athene,
watching this fight could have scorned it, not even in some strong
anger,
400 such was the wicked work of battle for men and for horses
Zeus strained tight above Patroklos that day. But the brilliant
Achilleus did not yet know at all that Patroklos had fallen.
Since now the men were fighting far away from the fast ships
under the Trojan wall, and Achilleus had no expectation
405 that Patroklos was dead, but thought he was alive and close under
the gates, and would come back. He had not thought that Patroklos
would storm the city without himself, nor with himself either;
for often he had word from his mother, not known to mortals;
she was ever telling him what was the will of great Zeus; but this time
410 his mother did not tell Achilleus of all the evil
that had been done, nor how his dearest companion had perished.
So they about the body gripping their headed spears kept
inexorably close together, and slaughtered on both sides.
And such would be the saying of some bronze-armored Achaian:
415 “Friends, there is no glory for usif we go back again
to our hollow ships, but here and now let the black earth open
gaping for all; this would soon be far better for us
if we give up this man to the Trojans, breakers of horses,
to take away to their own city and win glory from him.”
420 And such in turn would be the cry of some high-hearted Trojan:
“O friends, though it be destined for all of us to be killed here
over this man, still none of us must give ground from the fighting.”
Thus a man would speak, and stir the spirit in each one
of his fellowship. So they fought on, and the iron tumult
425 went up into the brazen sky through the barren bright air.
But the horses of Aiakides standing apart from the battle
wept, as they had done since they heard how their charioteer
had fallen in the dust at the hands of murderous Hektor.

In truth Automedon, the powerful son of Diores,
430 hit them over and over again with the stroke of the flying
lash, or talked to them, sometimes entreating them, sometimes
threatening.
They were unwilling to go back to the wide passage of Helle
and the ships, or back into the fighting after the Achaians,
but still as stands a grave monument which is set over
435 the mounded tomb of a dead man or lady, they stood there
holding motionless in its place the fair-wrought chariot,
leaning their heads along the ground, and warm tears were running
earthward from underneath the lids of the mourning horses
who longed for their charioteer, while their bright manes were made
dirty
440 as they streamed down either side of the yoke from under the yoke
pad.
As he watched the mourning horses the son of Kronos pitied them,
and stirred his head and spoke to his own spirit: “Poor wretches,
why then did we ever give you to the lord Peleus,
a mortal man, and you yourselves are immortal and ageless?
445 Only so that among unhappy men you also might be grieved?
Since among all creatures that breathe on earth and crawl on it
there is not anywhere a thing more dismal than man is.
At least the son of Priam, Hektor, shall not mount behind you
in the carefully wrought chariot. I will not let him. Is it not
450 enough for him that he has the armor and glories in wearing it?
But now I will put vigor into your knees and your spirits
so that you bring back Automedon out of the fighting
safe to the hollow ships; since I shall still give the Trojans
the glory of killing, until they win to the strong-benched vessels,
455 until the sun goes down and the blessed darkness comes over.”
So spoke Zeus, and breathed great vigor into the horses,
and they shaking the dust from their manes to the ground lightly
carried the running chariot among the Achaians and Trojans.
Automedon fought from them, though grieving for his companion.
460 He would dash in, like a vulture among geese, with his horses,
and lightly get away out of the Trojans’ confusion

and lightly charge in again in pursuit of a great multitude,
and yet could kill no men when he swept in in chase of them.
He had no way while he was alone in a separate chariot
465 to lunge with the spear and still keep in hand his fast-running horses.
But at last there was one of his companions who laid eyes upon him:
Alkimedon, the son of Laërkes, descended from Haimon.
He stood behind the chariot and called to Automedon:
“Automedon, what god put this unprofitable purpose
470 into your heart, and has taken away the better wits, so that
you are trying to fight the Trojans in the first shock of encounter
by yourself, since your companion has been killed, and Hektor
glories in wearing Aiakides’ armor on his own shoulders?”
In turn Automedon answered him, the son of Diores:
475 “Alkimedon, which other of the Achaians could handle
the management and the strength of immortal horses as you can,
were it not Patroklos, the equal of the immortals in counsel,
while he lived? Now death and fate have closed in upon him.
Therefore take over from me the whip and the glittering guide reins
480 while I dismount from behind the horses, so I may do battle.”
He spoke, and Alkimedon vaulted up to the charging chariot
and quickly gathered up the reins and the lash in his hands, while
Automedon sprang down. But glorious Hektor saw them
and immediately spoke to Aineias, who stood close beside him:
485 “Aineias, lord of the counsels of the bronze-armored Trojans,
I see before us the horses of swift-footed Aiakides
who appear now in the fighting with weak charioteers. Therefore
I could be hopeful of their capture, if you were willing
in heart to go with me. If we two went forth against them
490 they would not dare to stand their ground and do battle against us.”
He spoke, and the strong son of Anchises did not disobey him.
The two went strongly forward, hooding their shoulders in well-tanned
and stubborn hides of oxen with deep bronze beaten upon them.
Along with these went Chromios and godlike Aretos
495 both together, and the spirit within each had high hopes
of killing the men and driving away the strong-necked horses;
poor fools, who were not going to come back from Automedon

without the shedding of blood; and he with a prayer to Zeus father
was filled about the darkening heart with war-strength and courage,
500 and spoke now to Alkimedon his trusted companion:
“Alkimedon, no longer check the horses back from me
but keep them breathing right against my back. I have no thought
that I can stand up to the strength of Hektor the son of Priam.
Sooner, I think, he will kill us and mount behind the mane-floating
505 horses of Achilleus, and scatter the ranks of the Argive
fighting men; or else himself go down in the first rush.”
He spoke, and called to the two Aiantes and Menelaos:
“Aiantes, lords of the Argives, and Menelaos, we call you
to leave the dead man in the care of those who are fittest
510 to stand bestriding him and fend off the ranks of the Trojans
while you beat back the day without pity from us who are living.
For Hektor and Aineias, the greatest men of the Trojans,
are leaning the weight of their charge this way through the sorrowful
battle.
Yet all these are things that are lying upon the gods’ knees.
515 I myself will cast; and Zeus will look after the issue.”
So he spoke, and balanced the spear far-shadowed, and threw it,
and struck the shield of Aretos on its perfect circle,
nor could the shield hold off the spear, but the bronze smashed clean
through
and was driven on through the belt to the deep of the belly.
520 As when a strong-grown man with sharp axe in his hands chops
at an ox, ranger of the fields, behind the horns, cutting
all the way through the sinew, and the ox springing forward topples,
so Aretos sprang forward, then toppled back, and sharp-driven
into the depth of his belly the quivering spear unstrung him.
525 Then Hektor made a cast with the shining spear at Automedon,
but he, keeping his eyes straight on him, avoided the bronze spear.
For he bent forward, and behind his back the long spearshaft
was driven into the ground so that the butt end was shaken
on the spear. Then and there Ares the huge took the force from it.
530 And now they would have gone for each other with swords at close
quarters,

had not the two Aiantes driven strongly between them,
who came on through the battle at the call of their companion,
and in fear before them Hektor and Aineias and godlike
Chromios gave ground back and away once more, leaving
535 Aretos lying there where he was with a wound in his vitals.
Then Automedon, a match for the running god of battles,
stripped the armor, and spoke a word of boasting above him:
“Now I have put a little sorrow from my heart for Patroklos’
death, although the man I killed was not great as he was.”
540 So he spoke, and took up the bloody war spoils and laid them
inside the chariot, and himself mounted it, the blood running
from hands and feet, as on some lion who has eaten a bullock.
Once again over Patroklos was close drawn a strong battle
weary and sorrowful, and Athene from the sky descending
545 waked the bitter fighting, since Zeus of the wide brows sent her
down to stir the Danaäns, for now his purpose had shifted.
As when in the sky Zeus strings for mortals the shimmering
rainbow, to be a portent and sign of war, or of wintry
storm, when heat perishes, such storm as stops mortals’
550 work upon the face of the earth, and afflicts their cattle,
so Athene shrouded in the shimmering cloud about her
merged among the swarming Achaians, and wakened each man.
And first she spoke, stirring him on, to the son of Atreus,
strong Menelaos, since he was the one who was standing close to her.
555 She likened herself in form and weariless voice to Phoinix:
“Menelaos, this will be a thing of shame, a reproach said
of you, if under the wall of the Trojans the dogs in their fury
can mutilate the staunch companion of haughty Achilleus.
But hold strongly on, and stir up all the rest of your people.”
560 Then in turn Menelaos of the great war cry answered her:
“Phoinix, my father, aged and honored, if only Athene
would give me such strength, and hold the volleying missiles off from
me!
So for my part I would be willing to stand by Patroklos
and defend him, since in his death he hurt my heart greatly.
565 Yet Hektor holds still the awful strength of a fire, nor falters

in raging with the bronze spear, since Zeus is giving him glory.”
So he spoke, and the goddess gray-eyed Athene was happy
that first among all the divinities his prayer had bespoken her.
She put strength into the man’s shoulders and knees, inspiring
570 in his breast the persistent daring of that mosquito
who though it is driven hard away from a man’s skin, even
so, for the taste of human blood, persists in biting him.
With such daring she darkened to fullness the heart inside him.
He stood over Patroklos, and made a cast with the shining
575 spear. There was one among the Trojans, Podes, Eëtion’s
son, a rich man and good, whom Hektor prized above others
in the countryside, since he was his friend and ate at his table.
Now fair-haired Menelaos struck this man, at the war belt
as he swept away in flight, and drove the bronze spear clean through it.
580 He fell, thunderously, and Atreus’ son Menelaos
dragged the body away from the Trojans among his companions.
But now Apollo came and stood beside Hektor, and stirred him,
assuming the shape of Phainops, Asios’ son, who among all
guest friends was dearest to Hektor, and lived at home in Abydos.
585 In the likeness of this man far-striking Apollo spoke to him:
“Hektor, what other Achaian now shall be frightened before you?
See,you have shrunk before Menelaos, who in times before this
was a soft spearfighter; and now he has gone taking off single-handed
a body from among the Trojans. He has killed your trusted companion,
590 valiant among the champions, Podes, the son of Eëtion.”
He spoke, and the dark cloud of sorrow closed over Hektor.
He took his way among the champions helmed in the shining
bronze. And now the son of Kronos caught up the betasseled
glaring aegis, and shrouded Ida in mists. He let go
595 a lightning flash and a loud thunderstroke, shaking the mountain,
gave victory to the Trojans, and terrified the Achaians.
First to begin the flight was Peneleos the Boiotian.
For he, turning always toward the attack, was hit in the shoulder’s
end, a slight wound, but the spear of Poulydamas, who had thrown it

600 from a stance very close to him, had grated the bone’s edge.
Then Hektor wounded in the hand by the wrist Leïtos,
the son of great-hearted Alektryon, and halted his warcraft,
and he drew back staring about him since his spirit had hope no longer
of holding a spear steady in his hand to fight with the Trojans.
605 Now as Hektor made a rush for Leïtos, Idomeneus
struck him on the corselet over the chest by the nipple,
but the long shaft was broken behind the head, and the Trojans
shouted. Now Hektor made a cast at Deukalian Idomeneus
as he stood in his chariot, and missed him by only a little,
610 but struck the follower and charioteer of Meriones,
Koiranos, who had come with him from strong-founded Lyktos.
Now Idomeneus at the first had come on foot, leaving the oarswept
ships, and now would have given the Trojans a mighty triumph,
had not Koiranos swiftly come up with the fast-running horses;
615 came as light to the other and beat from him the day without pity,
but himself lost his life at the hands of manslaughtering Hektor,
who hit him under the jaw by the ear, and the spearshaft pushed out
his teeth by the roots from the base, and split the tongue through the
middle.
He toppled from the chariot, with the reins on the ground scattered,
620 but Meriones leaning down caught these up in his own hands
from the surface of the plain, and called aloud to Idomeneus:
“Lash them now, until you can get back to our fast ships.
You see yourself there is no more strength left in the Achaians.”
So he spoke, and Idomeneus whipped the mane-floating horses
625 back to the hollow ships, with fear fallen upon his spirit.
Nor was it unseen by great-hearted Aias how Zeus shifted
the strength of the fighting toward the Trojans, nor by Menelaos.
First of the two to speak was huge Telamonian Aias:
“Shame on it! By now even one with a child’s innocence
630 could see how father Zeus himself is helping the Trojans.
The weapons of each of these take hold, no matter who throws them,
good fighter or bad, since Zeus is straightening all of them equally,
while ours fall to the ground and are utterly useless. Therefore

let us deliberate with ourselves upon the best counsel,
635 how at the same time to rescue the dead body, and also
win back ourselves, and bring joy to our beloved companions
who look our way and sorrow for us, and believe no longer
that the fury of manslaughtering Hektor, his hands irresistible,
can be held, but must be driven on to the black ships.
640 But there should be some companion who could carry the message
quickly to Peleus’ son, since I think he has not yet heard
the ghastly news, how his beloved companion has fallen.
Yet I cannot make out such a man among the Achaians,
since they are held in the mist alike, the men and their horses.
645 Father Zeus, draw free from the mist the sons of the Achaians,
make bright the air, and give sight back to our eyes; in shining
daylight destroy us, if to destroy us be now your pleasure.”
He spoke thus, and as he wept the father took pity upon him,
and forthwith scattered the mist and pushed the darkness back from
them,
650 and the sun blazed out, and all the battle was plain before them.
Now Aias spoke to him of the great war cry, Menelaos:
“Look hard, illustrious Menelaos, if you can discover
Antilochos still living, the son of great-hearted Nestor,
and send him out to run with a message to wise Achilleus
655 how one who was far the dearest of his companions has fallen.”
He spoke, and Menelaos of the great war cry obeyed him,
and went on his way, as from a mid-fenced ground some lion
who has been harrying dogs and men, but his strength is worn out;
they will not let him tear out the fat of the oxen, watching
660 nightlong against him, and he in his hunger for meat closes in
but can get nothing of what he wants, for the raining javelins
thrown from the daring hands of the men beat ever against him,
and the flaming torches, and these he balks at for all of his fury,
and with the daylight goes away, disappointed of desire;
665 so Menelaos of the great war cry went from Patroklos
much unwilling, and was afraid for him, lest the Achaians
under pressure of fear might leave him as spoil for the enemy,

and had much to urge on Meriones and the Aiantes:
“Aiantes, O lords of the Argives, and you, Meriones,
670 now let each one of you remember unhappy Patroklos
who was gentle, and understood how to be kindly toward all men
while he lived. Now death and fate have closed in upon him.”
So spoke fair-haired Menelaos, and went away from them
peering about on all sides, like an eagle, who, as men say,
675 sees most sharply of all winged creatures under the heaven,
and lofty though he hover the cowering hare, the swift-footed,
escapes not his sight as he crouches in the shaggy bush, but the eagle
plunges suddenly to grab him and tear the life from him.
So now in you, Menelaos, illustrious, the eyes shining
680 circled everywhere your swarming hordes of companions,
if the man might see anywhere Nestor’s son, still living,
and saw soon where he was, at the left of the entire battle,
encouraging his companions and urging them into the fighting.
Menelaos the fair-haired stood beside him and spoke to him:
685 “Antilochos, turn this way, illustrious, and hear from me
the ghastly message of a thing I wish never had happened.
You can see for yourself, I think, already, from watching,
how the god is wheeling disaster against the Danaäns
and how the Trojans are winning. The best of the Achaians has fallen,
690 Patroklos, and a huge loss is inflicted upon the Danaäns.
Run then quickly to Achilleus, by the ships of the Achaians,
and tell him. He might in speed win back to his ship the dead body
which is naked. Hektor of the shining helm has taken his armor.”
So he spoke, and Antilochos hated his word as he listened.
695 He stayed for a long time without a word, speechless, and his eyes
filled with tears, the springing voice was held still within him,
yet even so he neglected not Menelaos’ order
but went on the run, handing his war gear to a blameless companion,
Laodokos, who had turned nearby his single-foot horses.

700

Now as his feet carried him, weeping, out of the battle,

with his message of evil for the son of Peleus, Achilleus,
so now, Menelaos, the spirit in you, illustrious,
wished not to defend his stricken companions, after Antilochos
was gone from them, and his loss wrought greatly upon the Pylians;
705 rather he sent Thrasymedes the brilliant over to help them,
while he himself went back again to the hero Patroklos
running, and took his place beside the Aiantes, and spoke to them:
“Now I have sent the man you spoke of back to the fast ships
on his way to swift-footed Achilleus, yet think not even
710 he can come now, for all his great anger with Hektor the brilliant.
There is no way he could fight bare of armor against the Trojans.
We by ourselves must deliberate upon the best counsel
how at the same time to rescue the dead body, and also
ourselves escape death and destiny from the clamoring Trojans.”
715 Then in turn huge Telamonian Aias answered him:
“All you have said, renowned Menelaos, is fair and orderly.
But come: you and Meriones stoop and shoulder the body
at once, and carry it out of the hard fighting. Behind you
we two shall fight off the Trojans and glorious Hektor,
720 we, who have the same name, the same spirit, and who in times past
have stood fast beside each other in the face of the bitter war god.”
He spoke, and they caught the body from the ground in their arms,
lifting
him high with a great heave, and the Trojan people behind them
shouted aloud as they saw the Achaians lifting the dead man,
725 and made a rush against them like dogs, who sweep in rapidly
on a wounded wild boar, ahead of the young men who hunt him,
and for the moment race in raging to tear him to pieces
until in the confidence of his strength he turns on them, at bay,
and they give ground and scatter for fear one way and another;
730 so the Trojans until that time kept always in close chase
assembled, stabbing at them with swords and leaf-headed spears,
but every time the two Aiantes would swing round to face them
and stand fast, the color of their skin changed, and no longer
could any endure to sweep in further and fight for the body.
735 So these, straining, carried the dead man out of the battle

and back to the hollow ships, and the fight that was drawn fast between
them
was wild as fire which, risen suddenly, storming a city
of men sets it ablaze, and houses diminish before it
in the high glare, and the force of the wind on it roars it to thunder;
740 so, as the Danaäns made their way back, the weariless roaring
of horses, chariots, and spearmen was ever upon them.
But they, as mules who have put the on-drive of strength upon them
drag down from the high ground along a steep stony trail either
a beam or some big timber for a ship, and the heart in them
745 wearies under the hard work and sweat of their urgent endeavor;
so these, straining, carried the dead man away, and behind them
the two Aiantes held them off, as a timbered rock ridge
holds off water, one that is placed to divide an entire plain,
which, though flood-currents of strong rivers drive sorely against it,
750 holds them off and beats back the waters of them all to be scattered
over the plain, and all the strength of their streams cannot break it;
so behind the Achaians the Aiantes held off forever
the Trojan attack. But these stayed close, and two beyond others,
Aineias, who was son of Anchises, and glorious Hektor.
755 But before these, as goes a cloud of daws or of starlings
screaming terror when they have seen coming forth against them
the hawk, whose coming is murder for the little birds, so now
before Aineias and Hektor the young Achaian warriors
went, screaming terror, all the delight of battle forgotten.
760 Many fine pieces of armor littered the ground on both sides
of the ditch, as the Danaäns fled. There was no check in the fighting.

BOOK EIGHTEEN

So these fought on in the likeness of blazing fire. Meanwhile,
Antilochos came, a swift-footed messenger, to Achilleus,
and found him sitting in front of the steep-horned ships, thinking
over in his heart of things which had now been accomplished.
5 Disturbed, Achilleus spoke to the spirit in his own great heart:
“Ah me, how is it that once again the flowing-haired Achaians
are driven out of the plain on their ships in fear and confusion?
May the gods not accomplish vile sorrows upon the heart in me
in the way my mother once made it clear to me, when she told me
10 how while I yet lived the bravest of all the Myrmidons
must leave the light of the sun beneath the hands of the Trojans.
Surely, then, the strong son of Menoitios has perished.
Unhappy! and yet I told him, once he had beaten the fierce fire
off, to come back to the ships, not fight in strength against Hektor.”

15

Now as he was pondering this in his heart and his spirit,
meanwhile the son of stately Nestor was drawing near him
and wept warm tears, and gave Achilleus his sorrowful message:
“Ah me, son of valiant Peleus; you must hear from me
the ghastly message of a thing I wish never had happened.
20 Patroklos has fallen, and now they are fighting over his body
which is naked. Hektor of the shining helm has taken his armor.”
He spoke, and the black cloud of sorrow closed on Achilleus.
In both hands he caught up the grimy dust, and poured it
over his head and face, and fouled his handsome countenance,
25 and the black ashes were scattered over his immortal tunic.

30

35

40

45

50

55

And he himself, mightily in his might, in the dust lay
at length, and took and tore at his hair with his hands, and defiled it.
And the handmaidens Achilleus and Patroklos had taken
captive, stricken at heart cried out aloud, and came running
out of doors about valiant Achilleus, and all of them
beat their breastswith their hands, and the limbs went slack in each of
them.
On the other side Antilochos mourned with him, letting the tears fall,
and held the hands of Achilleus as he grieved in his proud heart,
fearing Achilleus might cut his throat with the iron. He cried out
terribly, aloud, and the lady his mother heard him
as she sat in the depths of the sea at the side of her aged father,
and she cried shrill in turn, and the goddesses gathered about her,
all who along the depth of the sea were daughters of Nereus.
For Glauke was there, Kymodokē and Thaleia,
Nesaie and Speio and Thoë, and ox-eyed Halia;
Kymothoë was there, Aktaia and Limnoreia,
Melitē and Iaira, Amphithoë and Agauë,
Doto and Proto, Dynamenē and Pherousa,
Dexamenē and Amphinomē and Kallianeira;
Doris and Panopē and glorious Galateia,
Nemertes and Apseudes and Kallianassa;
Klymenē was there, Ianeira and Ianassa,
Maira and Oreithyia and lovely-haired Amatheia,
and the rest who along the depth of the sea were daughters of Nereus.
The silvery cave was filled with these, and together all of them
beat their breasts, and among them Thetis led out the threnody:
“Hear me, Nereïds, my sisters; so you may all know
well all the sorrows that are in my heart, when you hear of them from
me.
Ah me, my sorrow, the bitterness in this best of child-bearing,
since I gave birth to a son who was without fault and powerful,
conspicuous among heroes; and he shot up like a young tree,
and I nurtured him, like a tree grown in the pride of the orchard.
I sent him away with the curved ships into the land of Ilion
to fight with the Trojans; but I shall never again receive him

60 won home again to his country and into the house of Peleus.
Yet while I see him live and he looks on the sunlight, he has
sorrows, and though I go to him I can do nothing to help him.
Yet I shall go, to look on my dear son, and to listen
to the sorrow that has come to him as he stays back from the fighting.”

65

70

75

80

85

90

So she spoke, and left the cave, and the others together
went with her in tears, and about them the wave of the water
was broken. Now these, when they came to the generous Troad,
followed each other out on the seashore, where close together
the ships of the Myrmidons were hauled up about swift Achilleus.
There as he sighed heavily the lady his mother stood by him
and cried out shrill and aloud, and took her son’s head in her arms, then
sorrowing for him she spoke to him in winged words: “Why then,
child, do you lament? What sorrow has come to your heart now?
Speak out, do not hide it. These things are brought to accomplishment
through Zeus: in the way that you lifted your hands and prayed for,
that all the sons of the Achaians be pinned on their grounded vessels
by reason of your loss, and suffer things that are shameful.”
Then sighing heavily Achilleus of the swift feet answered her:
“My mother, all these things the Olympian brought to accomplishment.
But what pleasure is this to me, since my dear companion has perished,
Patroklos, whom I loved beyond all other companions,
as well as my own life. I have lost him, and Hektor, who killed him,
has stripped away that gigantic armor, a wonder to look on
and splendid, which the gods gave Peleus, a glorious present,
on that day they drove you to the marriage bed of a mortal.
I wish you had gone on living then with the other goddesses
of the sea, and that Peleus had married some mortal woman.
As it is, there must be on your heart a numberless sorrow
for your son’s death, since you can never again receive him
won home again to his country; since the spirit within does not drive
me
to go on living and be among men, except on condition

that Hektor first be beaten down under my spear, lose his life
and pay the price for stripping Patroklos, the son of Menoitios.”
Then in turn Thetis spoke to him, letting the tears fall:
95 “Then I must lose you soon, my child, by what you are saying,
since it is decreed your death must come soon after Hektor’s.”
Then deeply disturbed Achilleus of the swift feet answered her:
“I must die soon, then; since I was not to stand by my companion
when he was killed. And now, far away from the land of his fathers,
100 he has perished, and lacked my fighting strength to defend him.
Now, since I am not going back to the beloved land of my fathers,
since I was no light of safety to Patroklos, nor to my other
companions, who in their numbers went down before glorious Hektor,
but sit here beside my ships, a useless weight on the good land,
105 I, who am such as no other of the bronze-armored Achaians
in battle, though there are others also better in council—-why,
I wish that strife would vanish away from among gods and mortals,
and gall, which makes a man grow angry for all his great mind,
that gall of anger that swarms like smoke inside of a man’s heart
110 and becomes a thing sweeter to him by far than the dripping of honey.
So it was here that the lord of men Agamemnon angered me.
Still, we will let all this be a thing of the past, and for all our
sorrow beat down by force the anger deeply within us.
Now I shall go, to overtake that killer of a dear life,
115 Hektor; then I will accept my own death, at whatever
time Zeus wishes to bring it about, and the other immortals.
For not even the strength of Herakles fled away from destruction,
although he was dearest of all to lord Zeus, son of Kronos,
but his fate beat him under, and the wearisome anger of Hera.
120 So I likewise, if such is the fate which has been wrought for me,
shall lie still, when I am dead. Now I must win excellent glory,
and drive some one of the women of Troy, or some deep-girdled
Dardanian woman, lifting up to her soft cheeks both hands
to wipe away the close bursts of tears in her lamentation,
125 and learn that I stayed too long out of the fighting. Do not
hold me back from the fight, though you love me. You will not
persuade me.”

In turn the goddess Thetis of the silver feet answered him:
“Yes, it is true, my child, this is no cowardly action,
to beat aside sudden death from your afflicted companions.
130 Yet, see now, your splendid armor, glaring and brazen,
is held among the Trojans, and Hektor of the shining helmet
wears it on his own shoulders, and glories in it. Yet I think
he will not glory for long, since his death stands very close to him.
Therefore do not yet go into the grind of the war god,
135 not before with your own eyes you see me come back to you.
For I am coming to you at dawn and as the sun rises
bringing splendid armor to you from the lord Hephaistos.”
So she spoke, and turned, and went away from her son,
and turning now to her sisters of the sea she spoke to them:
140 “Do you now go back into the wide fold of the water
to visit the ancient of the sea and the house of our father,
and tell him everything. I am going to tall Olympos
and to Hephaistos, the glorious smith, if he might be willing
to give me for my son renowned and radiant armor.”
145 She spoke, and they plunged back beneath the wave of the water,
while she the goddess Thetis of the silver feet went onward
to Olympos, to bring back to her son the glorious armor.
So her feet carried her to Olympos; meanwhile the Achaians
with inhuman clamor before the attack of manslaughtering Hektor
150 fled until they were making for their own ships and the Hellespont;
nor could the strong-greaved Achaians have dragged the body
of Patroklos, henchman of Achilleus, from under the missiles,
for once again the men and the horses came over upon him,
and Hektor, Priam’s son, who fought like a flame in his fury.
155 Three times from behind glorious Hektor caught him
by the feet, trying to drag him, and called aloud on the Trojans.
Three times the two Aiantes with their battle-fury upon them
beat him from the corpse, but he, steady in the confidence of his great
strength,
kept making, now a rush into the crowd, or again at another time

160 stood fast, with his great cry, but gave not a bit of ground backward.
And as herdsmen who dwell in the fields are not able to frighten
a tawny lion in his great hunger away from a carcass,
so the two Aiantes, marshals of men, were not able
to scare Hektor, Priam’s son, away from the body.
165 And now he would have dragged it away and won glory forever
had not swift wind-footed Iris come running from Olympos
with a message for Peleus’ son to arm. She came secretly
from Zeus and the other gods, since it was Hera who sent her.
She came and stood close to him and addressed him in winged words:
170 “Rise up, son of Peleus, most terrifying of all men.
Defend Patroklos, for whose sake the terrible fighting
stands now in front of the ships. They are destroying each other;
the Achaians fight in defense over the fallen body
while the others, the Trojans, are rushing to drag the corpse off
175 to windy Ilion, and beyond all glorious Hektor
rages to haul it away, since the anger within him is urgent
to cut the head from the soft neck and set it on sharp stakes.
Up, then, lie here no longer; let shame come into your heart, lest
Patroklos become sport for the dogs of Troy to worry,
180 your shame, if the body goes from here with defilement upon it.”
Then in turn Achilleus of the swift feet answered her:
“Divine Iris, what god sent you to me with a message?”
Then in turn swift wind-footed Iris spoke to him:
“Hera sent me, the honored wife of Zeus; but the son of
185 Kronos, who sits on high, does not know this, nor any other
immortal, of all those who dwell by the snows of Olympos.”
Then in answer to her spoke Achilleus of the swift feet:
“How shall I go into the fighting? They have my armor.
And my beloved mother told me I must not be armored,
190 not before with my own eyes I see her come back to me.
She promised she would bring magnificent arms from Hephaistos.
Nor do I know of another whose glorious armor I could wear
unless it were the great shield of Telamonian Aias.
But he himself wears it, I think, and goes in the foremost
195 of the spear-fight over the body of fallen Patroklos.”

Then in turn swift wind-footed Iris spoke to him:
“Yes, we also know well how they hold your glorious armor.
But go to the ditch, and show yourself as you are to the Trojans,
if perhaps the Trojans might be frightened, and give way
200 from their attack, and the fighting sons of the Achaians get wind
again after hard work. There is little breathing space in the fighting.”
So speaking Iris of the swift feet went away from him;
but Achilleus, the beloved of Zeus, rose up, and Athene
swept about his powerful shoulders the fluttering aegis;
205 and she, the divine among goddesses, about his head circled
a golden cloud, and kindled from it a flame far-shining.
As when a flare goes up into the high air from a city
from an island far away, with enemies fighting about it
who all day long are in the hateful division of Ares
210 fighting from their own city, but as the sun goes down signal
fires blaze out one after another, so that the glare goes
pulsing high for men of the neighboring islands to see it,
in case they might come over in ships to beat off the enemy;
so from the head of Achilleus the blaze shot into the bright air.
215 He went from the wall and stood by the ditch, nor mixed with the other
Achaians, since he followed the close command of his mother.
There he stood, and shouted, and from her place Pallas Athene
gave cry, and drove an endless terror upon the Trojans.
As loud as comes the voice that is screamed out by a trumpet
220 by murderous attackers who beleaguer a city,
so then high and clear went up the voice of Aiakides.
But the Trojans, when they heard the brazen voice of Aiakides,
the heart was shaken in all, and the very floating-maned horses
turned their chariots about, since their hearts saw the coming
afflictions.
225 The charioteers were dumbfounded as they saw the unwearied
dangerous
fire that played above the head of great-hearted Peleion
blazing, and kindled by the goddess gray-eyed Athene.
Three times across the ditch brilliant Achilleus gave his great cry,

and three times the Trojans and their renowned companions were
routed.
230 There at that time twelve of the best men among them perished
upon their own chariots and spears. Meanwhile the Achaians
gladly pulled Patroklos out from under the missiles
and set him upon a litter, and his own companions about him
stood mourning, and along with them swift-footed Achilleus
235 went, letting fall warm tears as he saw his steadfast companion
lying there on a carried litter and torn with the sharp bronze,
the man he had sent off before with horses and chariot
into the fighting; who never again came home to be welcomed.
Now the lady Hera of the ox eyes drove the unwilling
240 weariless sun god to sink in the depth of the Ocean,
and the sun went down, and the brilliant Achaians gave over
their strong fighting, and the doubtful collision of battle.
The Trojans on the other side moved from the strong encounter
in their turn, and unyoked their running horses from under the chariots,
245 and gathered into assembly before taking thought for their supper.
They stood on their feet in assembly, nor did any man have the patience
to sit down, but the terror was on them all, seeing that Achilleus
had appeared, after he had stayed so long from the difficult fighting.
First to speak among them was the careful Poulydamas,
250 Panthoös’ son, who alone of them looked before and behind him.
He was companion to Hektor, and born on the same night with him,
but he was better in words, the other with the spear far better.
He in kind intention toward all stood forth and addressed them:
“Now take careful thought, dear friends; for I myself urge you
255 to go back into the city and not wait for the divine dawn
in the plain beside the ships. We are too far from the wall now.
While this man was still angry with great Agamemnon,
for all that time the Achaians were easier men to fight with.
For I also used then to be one who was glad to sleep out
260 near their ships, and I hoped to capture the oarswept vessels.
But now I terribly dread the swift-footed son of Peleus.
So violent is the valor in him, he will not be willing

to stay here in the plain, where now Achaians and Trojans
from either side sunder between them the wrath of the war god.
265 With him, the fight will be for the sake of our city and women.
Let us go into the town; believe me; thus it will happen.
For this present, immortal night has stopped the swift-footed
son of Peleus, but if he catches us still in this place
tomorrow, and drives upon us in arms, a man will be well
270 aware of him, be glad to get back into sacred Ilion,
the man who escapes; there will be many Trojans the vultures
and dogs will feed on. But let such a word be out of my hearing
! If all of us will do as I say, though it hurts us to do it,
this night we will hold our strength in the market place, and the great
walls
275 and the gateways, and the long, smooth-planed, close-joined gate
timbers
that close to fit them shall defend our city. Then, early
in the morning, under dawn, we shall arm ourselves in our war gear
and take stations along the walls. The worse for him, if he endeavors
to come away from the ships and fight us here for our city.
280 Back he must go to his ships again, when he wears out the strong
necks
of his horses, driving them at a gallop everywhere by the city.
His valor will not give him leave to burst in upon us
nor sack our town. Sooner the circling dogs will feed on him.”
Then looking darkly at him Hektor of the shining helm spoke:
285 “Poulydamas, these things that you argue please me no longer
when you tell us to go back again and be cooped in our city.
Have you not all had your glut of being fenced in our outworks?
There was a time when mortal men would speak of the city
of Priam as a place with much gold and much bronze. But now
290 the lovely treasures that lay away in our houses have vanished,
and many possessions have been sold and gone into Phrygia
and into Maionia the lovely, when great Zeus was angry.
But now, when the son of devious-devising Kronos has given
me the winning of glory by the ships, to pin the Achaians

295 on the sea, why, fool, no longer show these thoughts to our people.
Not one of the Trojans will obey you. I shall not allow it.
Come, then, do as I say and let us all be persuaded.
Now, take your supper by positions along the encampment,
and do not forget your watch, and let every man be wakeful.
300 And if any Trojan is strongly concerned about his possessions,
let him gather them and give them to the people, to use them in
common.
It is better for one of us to enjoy them than for the Achaians.
In the morning, under dawn, we shall arm ourselves in our war gear
and waken the bitter god of war by the hollow vessels.
305 If it is true that brilliant Achilleus is risen beside their
ships, then the worse for him if he tries it, since I for my part
will not run from him out of the sorrowful battle, but rather
stand fast, to see if he wins the great glory, or if I can win it.
The war god is impartial. Before now he has killed the killer.”

310

So spoke Hektor, and the Trojans thundered to hear him;
fools, since Pallas Athene had taken away the wits from them.
They gave their applause to Hektor in his counsel of evil,
but none to Poulydamas, who had spoken good sense before them.
They took their supper along the encampment. Meanwhile the
Achaians
315 mourned all night in lamentation over Patroklos.
Peleus’ son led the thronging chant of their lamentation,
and laid his manslaughtering hands over the chest of his dear friend
with outbursts of incessant grief. As some great bearded lion
when some man, a deer hunter, has stolen his cubs away from him
320 out of the close wood; the lion comes back too late, and is anguished,
and turns into many valleys quartering after the man’s trail
on the chance of finding him, and taken with bitter anger;
so he, groaning heavily, spoke out to the Myrmidons:
“Ah me. It was an empty word I cast forth on that day
325 when in his halls I tried to comfort the hero Menoitios.

I told him I would bring back his son in glory to Opous
with Ilion sacked, and bringing his share of war spoils allotted.
But Zeus does not bring to accomplishment all thoughts in men’s
minds.
Thus it is destiny for us both to stain the same soil
330 here in Troy; since I shall never come home, and my father,
Peleus the aged rider, will not welcome me in his great house,
nor Thetis my mother, but in this place the earth will receive me.
But seeing that it is I, Patroklos, who follow you underground,
I will not bury you till I bring to this place the armor
335 and the head of Hektor, since he was your great-hearted murderer.
Before your burning pyre I shall behead twelve glorious
children of the Trojans, for my anger over your slaying.
Until then, you shall lie where you are in front of my curved ships
and beside you women of Troy and deep-girdled Dardanian women
340 shall sorrow for you night and day and shed tears for you, those whom
you and I worked hard to capture by force and the long spear
in days when we were storming the rich cities of mortals.”
So speaking brilliant Achilleus gave orders to his companions
to set a great cauldron across the fire, so that with all speed
345 they could wash away the clotted blood from Patroklos.
They set up over the blaze of the fire a bath-water cauldron
and poured water into it and put logs underneath and kindled them.
The fire worked on the swell of the cauldron, and the water heated.
But when the water had come to a boil in the shining bronze, then
350 they washed the body and anointed it softly with olive oil
and stopped the gashes in his body with stored-up unguents
and laid him on a bed, and shrouded him in a thin sheet
from head to foot, and covered that over with a white mantle.
Then all night long, gathered about Achilleus of the swift feet,
355 the Myrmidons mourned for Patroklos and lamented over him.
But Zeus spoke to Hera, who was his wife and his sister:
“So you have acted, then, lady Hera of the ox eyes.
You have roused up Achilleus of the swift feet. It must be then

that the flowing-haired Achaians are born of your own generation.”
360 Then the goddess the ox-eyed lady Hera answered him:
“Majesty, son of Kronos, what sort of thing have you spoken?
Even one who is mortal will try to accomplish his purpose
for another, though he be a man and knows not such wisdom as we do.
As for me then, who claim I am highest of all the goddesses,
365 both ways, since I am eldest born and am called your consort,
yours, and you in turn are lord over all the immortals,
how could I not weave sorrows for the men of Troy, when I hate
them?”
Now as these two were saying things like this to each other,
Thetis of the silver feet came to the house of Hephaistos,
370 imperishable, starry, and shining among the immortals,
built in bronze for himself by the god of the dragging footsteps.
She found him sweating as he turned here and there to his bellows
busily, since he was working on twenty tripods
which were to stand against the wall of his strong-founded dwelling.
375 And he had set golden wheels underneath the base of each one
so that of their own motion they could wheel into the immortal
gathering, and return to his house: a wonder to look at.
These were so far finished, but the elaborate ear handles
were not yet on. He was forging these, and beating the chains out.
380 As he was at work on this in his craftsmanship and his cunning
meanwhile the goddess Thetis the silver-footed drew near him.
Charis of the shining veil saw her as she came forward,
she, the lovely goddess the renowned strong-armed one had married.
She came, and caught her hand and called her by name and spoke to
her:
385 “Why is it, Thetis of the light robes, you have come to our house now?
We honor you and love you; but you have not come much before this.
But come in with me, so I may put entertainment before you.
” She spoke, and, shining among divinities, led the way forward
and made Thetis sit down in a chair that was wrought elaborately
390 and splendid with silver nails, and under it was a footstool.
She called to Hephaistos the renowned smith and spoke a word to him:

“Hephaistos, come this way; here is Thetis, who has need of you.”
Hearing her the renowned smith of the strong arms answered her:
“Then there is a goddess we honor and respect in our house.
395 She saved me when I suffered much at the time of my great fall
through the will of my own brazen-faced mother, who wanted
to hide me, for being lame. Then my soul would have taken much
suffering
had not Eurynomē and Thetis caught me and held me,
Eurynomē, daughter of Ocean, whose stream bends back in a circle.
400 With them I worked nine years as a smith, and wrought many intricate
things; pins that bend back, curved clasps, cups, necklaces, working
there in the hollow of the cave, and the stream of Ocean around us
went on forever with its foam and its murmur. No other
among the gods or among mortal men knew about us
405 except Eurynomē and Thetis. They knew, since they saved me.
Now she has come into our house; so I must by all means
do everything to give recompense to lovely-haired Thetis
for my life. Therefore set out before her fair entertainment
while I am putting away my bellows and all my instruments.”

410

He spoke, and took the huge blower off from the block of the anvil
limping; and yet his shrunken legs moved lightly beneath him.
He set the bellows away from the fire, and gathered and put away
all the tools with which he worked in a silver strongbox.
Then with a sponge he wiped clean his forehead, and both hands,
415 and his massive neck and hairy chest, and put on a tunic,
and took up a heavy stick in his hand, and went to the doorway
limping. And in support of their master moved his attendants.
These are golden, and in appearance like living young women.
There is intelligence in their hearts, and there is speech in them
420 and strength, and from the immortal gods they have learned how to do
things.
These stirred nimbly in support of their master, and moving
near to where Thetis sat in her shining chair, Hephaistos

caught her by the hand and called her by name and spoke a word to her:
“Why is it, Thetis of the light robes, you have come to our house now?
425 We honor you and love you; but you have not come much before this.
Speak forth what is in your mind. My heart is urgent to do it
if I can, and if it is a thing that can be accomplished.”
Then in turn Thetis answered him, letting the tears fall:
“Hephaistos, is there among all the goddesses on Olympos
430 one who in her heart has endured so many grim sorrows
as the griefs Zeus, son of Kronos, has given me beyond others?
Of all the other sisters of the sea he gave me to a mortal,
to Peleus, Aiakos’ son, and I had to endure mortal marriage
though much against my will. And now he, broken by mournful
435 old age, lies away in his halls. Yet I have other troubles.
For since he has given me a son to bear and to raise up
conspicuous among heroes, and he shot up like a young tree,
I nurtured him, like a tree grown in the pride of the orchard.
I sent him away in the curved ships to the land of Ilion
440 to fight with the Trojans; but I shall never again receive him
won home again to his country and into the house of Peleus.
Yet while I see him live and he looks on the sunlight, he has
sorrows, and though I go to him I can do nothing to help him.
And the girl the sons of the Achaians chose out for his honor
445 powerful Agamemnon took her away again out of his hands.
For her his heart has been wasting in sorrow; but meanwhile the
Trojans
pinned the Achaians against their grounded ships, and would not
let them win outside, and the elders of the Argives entreated
my son, and named the many glorious gifts they would give him.
450 But at that time he refused himself to fight the death from them;
nevertheless he put his own armor upon Patroklos
and sent him into the fighting, and gave many men to go with him.
All day they fought about the Skaian Gates, and on that day
they would have stormed the city, if only Phoibos Apollo
455 had not killed the fighting son of Menoitios there in the first ranks
after he had wrought much damage, and given the glory to Hektor.
Therefore now I come to your knees; so might you be willing

to give me for my short-lived son a shield and a helmet
and two beautiful greaves fitted with clasps for the ankles
460 and a corselet. What he had was lost with his steadfast companion
when the Trojans killed him. Now my son lies on the ground, heart
sorrowing.”
Hearing her the renowned smith of the strong arms answered her:
“Do not fear. Let not these things be a thought in your mind.
And I wish that I could hide him away from death and its sorrow
465 at that time when his hard fate comes upon him, as surely
as there shall be fine armor for him, such as another
man out of many men shall wonder at, when he looks on it.”
So he spoke, and left her there, and went to his bellows.
He turned these toward the fire and gave them their orders for working.
470 And the bellows, all twenty of them, blew on the crucibles,
from all directions blasting forth wind to blow the flames high
now as he hurried to be at this place and now at another,
wherever Hephaistos might wish them to blow, and the work went
forward.
He cast on the fire bronze which is weariless, and tin with it
475 and valuable gold, and silver, and thereafter set forth
upon its standard the great anvil, and gripped in one hand
the ponderous hammer, while in the other he grasped the pincers.
First of all he forged a shield that was huge and heavy,
elaborating it about, and threw around it a shining
480 triple rim that glittered, and the shield strap was cast of silver.
There were five folds composing the shield itself, and upon it
he elaborated many things in his skill and craftsmanship.
He made the earth upon it, and the sky, and the sea’s water,
and the tireless sun, and the moon waxing into her fullness,
485 and on it all the constellations that festoon the heavens,
the Pleiades and the Hyadēs and the strength of Orion
and the Bear, whom men give also the name of the Wagon,
who turns about in a fixed place and looks at Orion
and she alone is never plunged in the wash of the Ocean.

490

On it he wrought in all their beauty two cities of mortal
men. And there were marriages in one, and festivals.
They were leading the brides along the city from their maiden
chambers
under the flaring of torches, and the loud bride song was arising.
The young men followed the circles of the dance, and among them
495 the flutes and lyres kept up their clamor as in the meantime
the women standing each at the door of her court admired them.
The people were assembled in the market place, where a quarrel
had arisen, and two men were disputing over the blood price
for a man who had been killed. One man promised full restitution
500 in a public statement, but the other refused and would accept nothing.
Both then made for an arbitrator, to have a decision;
and people were speaking up on either side, to help both men.
But the heralds kept the people in hand, as meanwhile the elders
were in session on benches of polished stone in the sacred circle
505 and held in their hands the staves of the heralds who lift their voices.
The two men rushed before these, and took turns speaking their cases,
and between them lay on the ground two talents of gold, to be given
to that judge who in this case spoke the straightest opinion.
But around the other city were lying two forces of armed men
510 shining in their war gear. For one side counsel was divided
whether to storm and sack, or share between both sides the property
and all the possessions the lovely citadel held hard within it.
But the city’s people were not giving way, and armed for an ambush.
Their beloved wives and their little children stood on the rampart
515 to hold it, and with them the men with age upon them, but meanwhile
the others went out. And Ares led them, and Pallas Athene.
These were gold, both, and golden raiment upon them, and they were
beautiful and huge in their armor, being divinities,
and conspicuous from afar, but the people around them were smaller.
520 These, when they were come to the place that was set for their ambush,
in a river, where there was a watering place for all animals,

there they sat down in place shrouding themselves in the bright bronze.
But apart from these were sitting two men to watch for the rest of them
and waiting until they could see the sheep and the shambling cattle,
525 who appeared presently, and two herdsmen went along with them
playing happily on pipes, and took no thought of the treachery.
Those others saw them, and made a rush, and quickly thereafter
cut off on both sides the herds of cattle and the beautiful
flocks of shining sheep, and killed the shepherds upon them.
530 But the other army, as soon as they heard the uproar arising
from the cattle, as they sat in their councils, suddenly mounted
behind their light-foot horses, and went after, and soon overtook them.
These stood their ground and fought a battle by the banks of the river,
and they were making casts at each other with their spears bronzeheaded;
535 and Hate was there with Confusion among them, and Death the
destructive;
she was holding a live man with a new wound, and another
one unhurt, and dragged a dead man by the feet through the carnage.
The clothing upon her shoulders showed strong red with the men’s
blood.
All closed together like living men and fought with each other
540 and dragged away from each other the corpses of those who had fallen.
He made upon it a soft field, the pride of the tilled land,
wide and triple-ploughed, with many ploughmen upon it
who wheeled their teams at the turn and drove them in either direction.
And as these making their turn would reach the end-strip of the field,
545 a man would come up to them at this point and hand them a flagon
of honey-sweet wine, and they would turn again to the furrows
in their haste to come again to the end-strip of the deep field.
The earth darkened behind them and looked like earth that has been
ploughed
though it was gold. Such was the wonder of the shield’s forging.

550

He made on it the precinct of a king, where the laborers

were reaping, with the sharp reaping hooks in their hands. Of the cut
swathes
some fell along the lines of reaping, one after another,
while the sheaf-binders caught up others and tied them with bind-ropes.
There were three sheaf-binders who stood by, and behind them
555 were children picking up the cut swathes, and filled their arms with
them
and carried and gave them always; and by them the king in silence
and holding his staff stood near the line of the reapers, happily.
And apart and under a tree the heralds made a feast ready
and trimmed a great ox they had slaughtered. Meanwhile the women
560 scattered, for the workmen to eat, abundant white barley.
He made on it a great vineyard heavy with clusters,
lovely and in gold, but the grapes upon it were darkened
and the vines themselves stood out through poles of silver. About them
he made a field-ditch of dark metal, and drove all around this
565 a fence of tin; and there was only one path to the vineyard,
and along it ran the grape-bearers for the vineyard’s stripping.
Young girls and young men, in all their light-hearted innocence,
carried the kind, sweet fruit away in their woven baskets,
and in their midst a youth with a singing lyre played charmingly
570 upon it for them, and sang the beautiful song for Linos
in a light voice, and they followed him, and with singing and whistling
and light dance-steps of their feet kept time to the music.
He made upon it a herd of horn-straight oxen. The cattle
were wrought of gold and of tin, and thronged in speed and with lowing
575 out of the dung of the farmyard to a pasturing place by a sounding
river, and beside the moving field of a reed bed.
The herdsmen were of gold who went along with the cattle,
four of them, and nine dogs shifting their feet followed them.
But among the foremost of the cattle two formidable lions
580 had caught hold of a bellowing bull, and he with loud lowings
was dragged away, as the dogs and the young men went in pursuit of
him.
But the two lions, breaking open the hide of the great ox,

gulped the black blood and the inward guts, as meanwhile the
herdsmen
were in the act of setting and urging the quick dogs on them.
585 But they, before they could get their teeth in, turned back from the
lions,
but would come and take their stand very close, and bayed, and kept
clear.
And the renowned smith of the strong arms made on it a meadow
large and in a lovely valley for the glimmering sheepflocks,
with dwelling places upon it, and covered shelters, and sheepfolds.
590 And the renowned smith of the strong arms made elaborate on it
a dancing floor, like that which once in the wide spaces of Knosos
Daidalos built for Ariadne of the lovely tresses.
And there were young men on it and young girls, sought for their
beauty
with gifts of oxen, dancing, and holding hands at the wrist. These
595 wore, the maidens long light robes, but the men wore tunics
of finespun work and shining softly, touched with olive oil.
And the girls wore fair garlands on their heads, while the young men
carried golden knives that hung from sword-belts of silver.
At whiles on their understanding feet they would run very lightly,
600 as when a potter crouching makes trial of his wheel, holding
it close in his hands, to see if it will run smooth. At another
time they would form rows, and run, rows crossing each other.
And around the lovely chorus of dancers stood a great multitude
happily watching, while among the dancers two acrobats
605 led the measures of song and dance revolving among them.
He made on it the great strength of the Ocean River
which ran around the uttermost rim of the shield’s strong structure.
Then after he had wrought this shield, which was huge and heavy,
he wrought for him a corselet brighter than fire in its shining,
610 and wrought him a helmet, massive and fitting close to his temples,
lovely and intricate work, and laid a gold top-ridge along it,
and out of pliable tin wrought him leg-armor. Thereafter
when the renowned smith of the strong arms had finished the armor

he lifted it and laid it before the mother of Achilleus.
615 And she like a hawk came sweeping down from the snows of Olympos
and carried with her the shining armor, the gift of Hephaistos.

BOOK NINETEEN

Now Dawn the yellow-robed arose from the river of Ocean
to carry her light to men and to immortals. And Thetis
came to the ships and carried with her the gifts of Hephaistos.
She found her beloved son lying in the arms of Patroklos
5 crying shrill, and his companions in their numbers about him
mourned. She, shining among divinities, stood there beside them.
She clung to her son’s hand and called him by name and spoke to him:
“My child, now, though we grieve for him, we must let this man lie
dead, in the way he first was killed through the gods’ designing.
10 Accept rather from me the glorious arms of Hephaistos,
so splendid, and such as no man has ever worn on his shoulders.”
The goddess spoke so, and set down the armor on the ground
before Achilleus, and all its elaboration clashed loudly.
Trembling took hold of all the Myrmidons. None had the courage
15 to look straight at it. They were afraid of it. Only Achilleus
looked, and as he looked the anger came harder upon him
and his eyes glittered terribly under his lids, like sunflare.
He was glad, holding in his hands the shining gifts of Hephaistos.
But when he had satisfied his heart with looking at the intricate
20 armor, he spoke to his mother and addressed her in winged words:
“My mother, the god has given me these weapons; they are such
as are the work of immortals. No mortal man could have made them.
Therefore now I shall arm myself in them. Yet I am sadly
afraid, during this time, for the warlike son of Menoitios
25 that flies might get into the wounds beaten by bronze in his body
and breed worms in them, and these make foul the body, seeing
that the life is killed in him, and that all his flesh may be rotted.”
In turn the goddess Thetis the silver-footed answered him:

“My child, no longer let these things be a care in your mind.
30 I shall endeavor to drive from him the swarming and fierce things,
those flies, which feed upon the bodies of men who have perished;
and although he lie here till a year has gone to fulfillment,
still his body shall be as it was, or firmer than ever.
Go then and summon into assembly the fighting Achaians,
35 and unsay your anger against Agamemnon, shepherd of the people,
and arm at once for the fighting, and put your war strength upon you.”
She spoke so, and drove the strength of great courage into him;
and meanwhile through the nostrils of Patroklos she distilled
ambrosia and red nectar, so that his flesh might not spoil.

40

But he, brilliant Achilleus, walked along by the seashore
crying his terrible cry, and stirred up the fighting Achaians.
And even those who before had stayed where the ships were
assembled,
they who were helmsmen of the ships and handled the steering oar,
they who were stewards among the ships and dispensers of rations,
45 even these came then to assembly, since now Achilleus
had appeared, after staying so long from the sorrowful battle.
And there were two who came limping among them, henchmen of Ares
both, Tydeus’ son the staunch in battle, and brilliant Odysseus,
leaning on spears, since they had the pain of their wounds yet upon
them,
50 and came and took their seats in the front rank of those assembled.
And last of them came in the lord of men Agamemnon
with a wound on him, seeing that Koön, the son of Antenor,
had stabbed him with the bronze edge of the spear in the strong
encounter.
But now, when all the Achaians were in one body together,
55 Achilleus of the swift feet stood up before them and spoke to them:
“Son of Atreus, was this after all the better way for
both, for you and me, that we, for all our hearts’ sorrow,
quarreled together for the sake of a girl in soul-perishing hatred?

I wish Artemis had killed her beside the ships with an arrow
60 on that day when I destroyed Lyrnessos and took her.
For thus not all these too many Achaians would have bitten
the dust, by enemy hands, when I was away in my anger.
This way was better for the Trojans and Hektor; yet I think
the Achaians will too long remember this quarrel between us.
65 Still, we will let all this be a thing of the past, though it hurts us,
and beat down by constraint the anger that rises inside us.
Now I am making an end of my anger. It does not become me
unrelentingly to rage on. Come, then! The more quickly
drive on the flowing-haired Achaians into the fighting,
70 so that I may go up against the Trojans, and find out
if they still wish to sleep out beside the ships. I think rather
they will be glad to rest where they are, whoever among them
gets away with his life from the fury of our spears’ onset.”

75

80

85

90

He spoke, and the strong-greaved Achaians were pleasured to hear
him
and how the great-hearted son of Peleus unsaid his anger.
Now among them spoke forth the lord of men Agamemnon
from the place where he was sitting, and did not stand up among them:
“Fighting men and friends, O Danaäns, henchmen of Ares:
it is well to listen to the speaker, it is not becoming
to break in on him. This will be hard for him, though he be able.
How among the great murmur of people shall anyone listen
or speak either? A man, though he speak very clearly, is baffled.
I shall address the son of Peleus; yet all you other
Argives listen also, and give my word careful attention.
This is the word the Achaians have spoken often against me
and found fault with me in it, yet I am not responsible
but Zeus is, and Destiny, and Erinys the mist-walking
who in assembly caught my heart in the savage delusion
on that day I myself stripped from him the prize of Achilleus.
Yet what could I do? It is the god who accomplishes all things.
Delusion is the elder daughter of Zeus, the accursed
who deludes all; her feet are delicate and they step not

on the firm earth, but she walks the air above men’s heads
and leads them astray. She has entangled others before me.
95 Yes, for once Zeus even was deluded, though men say
he is the highest one of gods and mortals. Yet Hera
who is female deluded even Zeus in her craftiness
on that day when in strong wall-circled Thebe Alkmene
was at her time to bring forth the strength of Herakles. Therefore
100 Zeus spoke forth and made a vow before all the immortals:
‘Hear me, all you gods and all you goddesses: hear me
while I speak forth what the heart within my breast urges.
This day Eileithyia of women’s child-pains shall bring forth
a man to the light who, among the men sprung of the generation
105 of my blood, shall be lord over all those dwelling about him.’
Then in guileful intention the lady Hera said to him:
‘You will be a liar, not put fulfillment on what you have spoken.
Come, then, lord of Olympos, and swear before me a strong oath
that he shall be lord over all those dwelling about him
110 who this day shall fall between the feet of a woman,
that man who is born of the blood of your generation.’ So Hera
spoke. And Zeus was entirely unaware of her falsehood,
but swore a great oath, and therein lay all his deception.
But Hera in a flash of speed left the horn of Olympos
115 and rapidly came to Argos of Achaia, where she knew
was the mighty wife of Sthenelos, descended of Perseus.
And she was carrying a son, and this was the seventh month for her,
but she brought him sooner into the light, and made him premature,
and stayed the childbirth of Alkmene, and held back the birth pangs.
120 She went herself and spoke the message to Zeus, son of Kronos:
8216;Father Zeus of the shining bolt, I will tell you a message
for your heart. A great man is born, who will be lord over the Argives,
Eurystheus, son of Sthenelos, of the seed of Perseus,
your generation. It is not unfit that he should rule over
125 the Argives.’ She spoke, and the sharp sorrow struck at his deep heart.
He caught by the shining hair of her head the goddess Delusion
in the anger of his heart, and swore a strong oath, that never
after this might Delusion, who deludes all, come back

to Olympos and the starry sky. So speaking, he whirled her
130 about in his hand and slung her out of the starry heaven,
and presently she came to men’s establishments. But Zeus
would forever grieve over her each time that he saw his dear son
doing some shameful work of the tasks that Eurystheus set him.
So I in my time, when tall Hektor of the shining helm
135 was forever destroying the Argives against the sterns of their vessels,
could not forget Delusion, the way I was first deluded.
But since I was deluded and Zeus took my wits away from me,
I am willing to make all good and give back gifts in abundance.
Rise up, then, to the fighting and rouse the rest of the people.
140 Here am I, to give you all those gifts, as many
as brilliant Odysseus yesterday went to your shelter and promised.
Or if you will, hold back, though you lean hard into the battle,
while my followers take the gifts from my ship and bring them
to you, so you may see what I give to comfort your spirit.”

145

Then in answer to him spoke Achilleus of the swift feet:
“Son of Atreus, most lordly and king of men, Agamemnon,
the gifts are yours to give if you wish, and as it is proper,
or to keep with yourself. But now let us remember our joy in warcraft,
immediately, for it is not fitting to stay here and waste time
150 nor delay, since there is still a big work to be done.
So can a man see once more Achilleus among the front fighters
with the bronze spear wrecking the Trojan battalions. Therefore
let each of you remember this and fight his antagonist.”
Then in answer to him spoke resourceful Odysseus:
155 “Not that way, good fighter that you are, godlike Achilleus.
Do not drive the sons of the Achaians on Ilion when they are hungry,
to fight against the Trojans, since not short will be the time
of battle, once the massed formations of men have encountered
together, with the god inspiring fury in both sides.
160 Rather tell the men of Achaia here by their swift ships,
to take food and wine, since these make fighting fury and warcraft.

For a man will not have strength to fight his way forward all day
long until the sun goes down if he is starved for food. Even
though in his heart he be very passionate for the battle,
165 yet without his knowing it his limbs will go heavy, and hunger
and thirst will catch up with him and cumber his knees as he moves on.
But when a man has been well filled with wine and with eating
and then does battle all day long against the enemy,
why, then the heart inside him is full of cheer, nor do his limbs
170 get weary, until all are ready to give over the fighting.
Come then, tell your men to scatter and bid them get ready
a meal; and as for the gifts, let the lord of men Agamemnon
bring them to the middle of our assembly so all the Achaians
can see them before their eyes, so your own heart may be pleasured.
175 And let him stand up before the Argives and swear an oath to you
that he never entered into her bed and never lay with her
as is natural for people, my lord, between men and women.
And by this let the spirit in your own heart be made gracious.
After that in his own shelter let him appease you
180 with a generous meal, so you will lack nothing of what is due you.
And you, son of Atreus, after this be more righteous to another
man. For there is no fault when even one who is a king
appeases a man, when the king was the first one to be angry.”
Then in turn the lord of men Agamemnon answered him: “
185 Hearing what you have said, son of Laërtes, I am pleased with you.
Fairly have you gone through everything and explained it.
And all this I am willing to swear to, and my heart urges me,
and I will not be foresworn before the gods. Let Achilleus
stay here the while, though he lean very hard toward the work of the
war god,
190 and remain the rest of you all here assembled, until the gifts come
back from my shelter and while we cut our oaths of fidelity.
And for you yourself, Odysseus, I give you this errand, this order,
that you choose out excellent young men of all the Achaians
and bring the gifts back here from my ship, all that you promised
195 yesterday to Achilleus, and bring the women back also.
And in the wide host of the Achaians let Talthybios make ready

a boar for me, and dedicate it to Zeus and Helios.”
Then in answer to him spoke Achilleus of the swift feet:
“Son of Atreus, most lordly and king of men, Agamemnon,
200 at some other time rather you should busy yourself about these things,
when there is some stopping point in the fighting, at some time
when there is not so much fury inside of my heart. But now
as things are they lie there torn whom the son of Priam
Hektor has beaten down, since Zeus was giving him glory,
205 and then you urge a man to eating. No, but I would now
drive forward the sons of the Achaians into the fighting
starving and unfed, and afterward when the sun sets
make ready a great dinner, when we have paid off our defilement.
But before this, for me at least, neither drink nor food shall
210 go down my very throat, since my companion has perished
and lies inside my shelter torn about with the cutting
bronze, and turned against the forecourt while my companions
mourn about him. Food and drink mean nothing to my heart
but blood does, and slaughter, and the groaning of men in the hard
work.”
215 Then in answer to him spoke resourceful Odysseus:
“Son of Peleus, Achilleus, far greatest of the Achaians,
you are stronger than I am and greater by not a little
with the spear, yet I in turn might overpass you in wisdom
by far, since I was born before you and have learned more things.
220 Therefore let your heart endure to listen to my words.
When there is battle men have suddenly their fill of it
when the bronze scatters on the ground the straw in most numbers
and the harvest is most thin, when Zeus has poised his balance,
Zeus, who is administrator to men in their fighting.
225 There is no way the Achaians can mourn a dead man by denying
the belly. Too many fall day by day, one upon another,
and how could anyone find breathing space from his labor?
No, but we must harden our hearts and bury the man who
dies, when we have wept over him on the day, and all those
230 who are left about from the hateful work of war must remember
food and drink, so that afterward all the more strongly

we may fight on forever relentless against our enemies
with the weariless bronze put on about our bodies. Let one not
wait longing for any other summons to stir on the people.
235 This summons now shall be an evil on anyone left behind
by the ships of the Argives. Therefore let us drive on together
and wake the bitter war god on the Trojans, breakers of horses.”
He spoke, and went away with the sons of glorious Nestor,
with Meges, the son of Phyleus, and Meriones, and Thoas,
240 and Lykomedes, the son of Kreion, and Melanippos. These went
on their way to the shelter of Atreus’ son Agamemnon.
No sooner was the order given than the thing had been done.
They brought back seven tripods from the shelter, those Agamemnon
had promised, and twenty shining cauldrons, twelve horses. They
brought back
245 immediately the seven women the work of whose hands was
blameless, and the eighth of them was Briseis of the fair cheeks.
Odysseus weighed out ten full talents of gold and led them
back, and the young men of the Achaians carried the other gifts.
They brought these into the midst of assembly, and Agamemnon
250 stood up, and Talthybios in voice like an immortal
stood beside the shepherd of the people with the boar in his hands.
Atreus’ son laid hands upon his work-knife, and drew it
from where it hung ever beside the great sheath of his war sword,
and cut first hairs away from the boar, and lifting his hands up
255 to Zeus, prayed, while all the Argives stayed fast at their places
in silence and in order of station, and listened to their king.
He spoke before them in prayer gazing into the wide sky:
“Let Zeus first be my witness, highest of the gods and greatest,
and Earth, and Helios the Sun, and Furies, who underground
260 avenge dead men, when any man has sworn to a falsehood,
that I have never laid a hand on the girl Briseis
on pretext to go to bed with her, or for any other
reason, but she remained, not singled out, in my shelter.
If any of this is falsely sworn, may the gods give me many
265 griefs, all that they inflict on those who swear falsely before them.”

So he spoke, and with pitiless bronze he cut the boar’s throat.
Talthybios whirled the body about, and threw it in the great reach
of the gray sea, to feed the fishes. Meanwhile Achilleus
stood up among the battle-fond Achaians, and spoke to them:
270 “Father Zeus, great are the delusions with which you visit men.
Without you, the son of Atreus could never have stirred so
the heart inside my breast, nor taken the girl away from me
against my will, and be in helplessness. No, but Zeus somehowwished
that death should befall great numbers of the Achaians.
275 Go now and take your dinner, so we may draw on the battle.”

So he spoke, and suddenly broke up the assembly.
Now these scattered away each man to his own ship. Meanwhile
the great-hearted Myrmidons disposed of the presents.
They went on their way carrying them to the ship of godlike Achilleus,
280 and stowed the gifts in the shelters, and let the women be settled,
while proud henchmen drove the horses into Achilleus’ horse-herd.
And now, in the likeness of golden Aphrodite, Briseis
when she saw Patroklos lying torn with sharp bronze, folding
him in her arms cried shrilly above him and with her hands tore
285 at her breasts and her soft throat and her beautiful forehead.
The woman like the immortals mourning for him spoke to him:
“Patroklos, far most pleasing to my heart in its sorrows,
I left you here alive when I went away from the shelter,
but now I come back, lord of the people, to find you have fallen.
290 So evil in my life takes over from evil forever.
The husband on whom my father and honored mother bestowed me
I saw before my city lying torn with the sharp bronze,
and my three brothers, whom a single mother bore with me
and who were close to me, all went on one day to destruction.
295 And yet you would not let me, when swift Achilleus had cut down
my husband, and sacked the city of godlike Mynes, you would not
let me sorrow, but said you would make me godlike Achilleus’
wedded lawful wife, that you would take me back in the ships

to Phthia, and formalize my marriage among the Myrmidons.
300 Therefore I weep your death without ceasing. You were kind always.”
So she spoke, lamenting, and the women sorrowed around her
grieving openly for Patroklos, but for her own sorrows
each. But the lords of Achaia were gathered about Achilleus
beseeching him to eat, but he with a groan denied them:
305 “I beg of you, if any dear companion will listen
to me, stop urging me to satisfy the heart in me
with food and drink, since this strong sorrow has come upon me.
I will hold out till the sun goes down and endure, though it be hard.”
So he spoke, and caused the rest of the kings to scatter;
310 but the two sons of Atreus stayed with him, and brilliant Odysseus,
and Nestor, and Idomeneus, and the aged charioteer, Phoinix,
comforting him close in his sorrow, yet his heart would not
be comforted, till he went into the jaws of the bleeding battle.
Remembering Patroklos he sighed much for him, and spoke aloud:
315 “There was a time, ill fated, O dearest of all my companions,
when you yourself would set the desirable dinner before me
quickly and expertly, at the time the Achaians were urgent
to carry sorrowful war on the Trojans, breakers of horses.
But now you lie here torn before me, and my heart goes starved
320 for meat and drink, though they are here beside me, by reason
of longing for you. There is nothing worse than this I could suffer,
not even if I were to hear of the death of my father
who now, I think, in Phthia somewhere lets fall a soft tear
for bereavement of such a son, for me, who now in a strange land
325 make war upon the Trojans for the sake of accursed Helen;
or the death of my dear son, who is raised for my sake in Skyros
now, if godlike Neoptolemos is still one of the living.
Before now the spirit inside my breast was hopeful
that I alone should die far away from horse-pasturing Argos
330 here in Troy; I hoped you would win back again to Phthia
so that in a fast black ship you could take my son back
from Skyros to Phthia, and show him all my possessions,
my property, my serving men, my great high-roofed house.

For by this time I think that Peleus must altogether
335 have perished, or still keeps a little scant life in sorrow
for the hatefulness of old age and because he waits ever from me
the evil message, for the day he hears I have been killed.”
So he spoke, mourning, and the elders lamented around him
remembering each those he had left behind in his own halls.
340 The son of Kronos took pity on them as he watched them mourning
and immediately spoke in winged words to Athene:
“My child, have you utterly abandoned the man of your choice?
Is there no longer deep concern in your heart for Achilleus?
Now he has sat down before the steep horned ships and is mourning
345 for his own beloved companion, while all the others
have gone to take their dinner, but he is fasting and unfed.
Go then to him and distil nectar inside his chest, and delicate
ambrosia, so the weakness of hunger will not come upon him.”
Speaking so, he stirred Athene, who was eager before this,
350 and she in the likeness of a wide-winged, thin-crying
hawk plummeted from the sky through the bright air. Now the
Achaians
were arming at once along the encampment. She dropped the delicate
ambrosia and the nectar inside the breast of Achilleus
softly, so no sad weakness of hunger would come on his knees,
355 and she herself went back to the close house of her powerful
father, while they were scattering out away from the fast ships.
As when in their thickness the snowflakes of Zeus come fluttering
cold beneath the blast of the north wind born in the bright sky,
so now in their thickness the pride of the helms bright shining
360 were carried out from the ships, and shields massive in the middle
and the corselets strongly hollowed and the ash spears were worn forth.
The shining swept to the sky and all earth was laughing about them
under the glitter of bronze and beneath their feet stirred the thunder
of men, within whose midst brilliant Achilleus helmed him.
365 A clash went from the grinding of his teeth, and his eyes glowed
as if they were the stare of a fire, and the heart inside him
was entered with sorrow beyond endurance. Raging at the Trojans

he put on the gifts of the god, that Hephaistos wrought him with much
toil.
First he placed along his legs the fair greaves linked with
370 silver fastenings to hold the greaves at the ankles.
Afterward he girt on about his chest the corselet,
and across his shoulders slung the sword with the nails of silver,
a bronze sword, and caught up the great shield, huge and heavy
next, and from it the light glimmered far, as from the moon.
375 And as when from across water a light shines to mariners
from a blazing fire, when the fire is burning high in the mountains
in a desolate steading, as the mariners are carried unwilling
by storm winds over the fish-swarming sea, far away from their loved
ones;
so the light from the fair elaborate shield of Achilleus
380 shot into the high air. And lifting the helm he set it
massive upon his head, and the helmet crested with horse-hair
shone like a star, the golden fringes were shaken about it
which Hephaistos had driven close along the horn of the helmet.
And brilliant Achilleus tried himself in his armor, to see
385 if it fitted close, and how his glorious limbs ran within it,
and the armor became as wings and upheld the shepherd of the people.
Next he pulled out from its standing place the spear of his father,
huge, heavy, thick, which no one else of all the Achaians
could handle, but Achilleus alone knew how to wield it,
390 the Pelian ash spear which Cheiron had brought to his father
from high on Pelion, to be death for fighters in battle.
Automedon and Alkimos, in charge of the horses,
yoked them, and put the fair breast straps about them, and forced the
bits home
between their jaws, and pulled the reins back against the compacted
395 chariot seat, and one, Automedon, took up the shining
whip caught close in his hand and vaulted up to the chariot,
while behind him Achilleus helmed for battle took his stance
shining in all his armor like the sun when he crosses above us,
and cried in a terrible voice on the horses of his father: “

400 Xanthos, Balios, Bay and Dapple, famed sons of Podarge,
take care to bring in another way your charioteer back
to the company of the Danaäns, when we give over fighting,
not leave him to lie fallen there, as you did to Patroklos.”
Then from beneath the yoke the gleam-footed horse answered him,
405 Xanthos, and as he spoke bowed his head, so that all the mane
fell away from the pad and swept the ground by the cross-yoke;
the goddess of the white arms, Hera, had put a voice in him:
“We shall still keep you safe for this time, O hard Achilleus.
And yet the day of your death is near, but it is not we
410 who are to blame, but a great god and powerful Destiny.
For it was not because we were slow, because we were careless,
that the Trojans have taken the armor from the shoulders of Patroklos,
but it was that high god, the child of lovely-haired Leto,
who killed him among the champions and gave the glory to Hektor.
415 But for us, we two could run with the blast of the west wind
who they say is the lightest of all things; yet still for you
there is destiny to be killed in force by a god and a mortal.”
When he had spoken so the Furies stopped the voice in him,
but deeply disturbed, Achilleus of the swift feet answered him: “
420 Xanthos, why do you prophesy my death? This is not for you.
I myself know well it is destined for me to die here
far from my beloved father and mother. But for all that
I will not stop till the Trojans have had enough of my fighting.”
He spoke, and shouting held on in the foremost his single-foot horses.

BOOK TWENTY

5

10

15

20

25

So these now, the Achaians, beside the curved ships were arming
around you, son of Peleus, insatiate of battle,
while on the other side at the break of the plain the Trojans
armed. But Zeus, from the many-folded peak of Olympos,
told Themis to summon all the gods into assembly. She went
everywhere, and told them to make their way to Zeus’ house.
There was no river who was not there, except only Ocean,
there was not any one of the nymphs who live in the lovely
groves, and the springs of rivers and grass of the meadows, who came
not.
These all assembling into the house of Zeus cloud gathering
took places among the smooth-stone cloister walks which Hephaistos
had built for Zeus the father by his craftsmanship and contrivance.
So they were assembled within Zeus’ house; and the shaker
of the earth did not fail to hear the goddess, but came up among them
from the sea, and sat in the midst of them, and asked Zeus of his
counsel:
“Why, lord of the shining bolt, have you called the gods to assembly
once more? Are you deliberating Achaians and Trojans?
For the onset of battle is almost broken to flame between them.”
In turn Zeus who gathers the clouds spoke to him in answer:
“You have seen, shaker of the earth, the counsel within me,
and why I gathered you. I think of these men though they are dying.
Even so, I shall stay here upon the fold of Olympos
sitting still, watching, to pleasure my heart. Meanwhile all you others
go down, wherever you may go among the Achaians and Trojans
and give help to either side, as your own pleasure directs you.
For if we leave Achilleus alone to fight with the Trojans

they will not even for a little hold off swift-footed Peleion.
For even before now they would tremble whenever they saw him,
and now, when his heart is grieved and angered for his companion’s
30 death, I fear against destiny he may storm their fortress.”
So spoke the son of Kronos and woke the incessant battle,
and the gods went down to enter the fighting, with purposes opposed.
Hera went to the assembled ships with Pallas Athene
and with Poseidon who embraces the earth, and with generous
35 Hermes, who within the heart is armed with astute thoughts.
Hephaistos went the way of these in the pride of his great strength
limping, and yet his shrunken legs moved lightly beneath him.
But Ares of the shining helm went over to the Trojans,
and with him Phoibos of the unshorn hair, and the lady of arrows
40 Artemis, and smiling Aphrodite, Leto, and Xanthos.
Now in the time when the gods were still distant from the mortals,
so long the Achaians were winning great glory, since now Achilleus
showed among them, who had stayed too long from the sorrowful
fighting.
But the Trojans were taken every man in the knees with trembling
45 and terror, as they looked on the swift-footed son of Peleus
shining in all his armor, a man like the murderous war god.
But after the Olympians merged in the men’s company
strong Hatred, defender of peoples, burst out, and Athene bellowed
standing now beside the ditch dug at the wall’s outside
50 and now again at the thundering sea’s edge gave out her great cry,
while on the other side Ares in the likeness of a dark stormcloud
bellowed, now from the peak of the citadel urging the Trojans
sharply on, now running beside the sweet banks of Simoeis.
So the blessed gods stirring on the opponents drove them
55 together, and broke out among themselves the weight of their quarrel.
From high above the father of gods and men made thunder
terribly, while Poseidon from deep under them shuddered
all the illimitable earth, the sheer heads of the mountains.
And all the feet of Ida with her many waters were shaken
60 and all her crests, and the city of Troy, the ships of the Achaians.
Aïdoneus, lord of the dead below, was in terror

and sprang from his throne and screamed aloud, for fear that above him
he who circles the land, Poseidon, might break the earth open
and the houses of the dead lie open to men and immortals,
65 ghastly and moldering, so the very gods shudder before them;
such was the crash that sounded as the gods came driving together
in wrath. For now over against the lord Poseidon
Phoibos Apollo took his stand with his feathered arrows,
and against Enyalios the goddess gray-eyed Athene.
70 Against Hera stood the lady of clamor, of the golden distaff,
of the showering arrows, Artemis, sister of the far striker.
Opposite Leto stood the strong one, generous Hermes,
and against Hephaistos stood the great deep-eddying river
who is called Xanthos by the gods, but by mortals Skamandros.

75

Thus gods went on to encounter gods; and meanwhile Achilleus
was straining to plunge into the combat opposite Hektor
Priam’s son, since beyond all others his anger was driving him
to glut with his blood Ares the god who fights under the shield’s guard.
But it was Aineias whom Apollo defender of people
80 drove straight against Peleion, and inspired vast power within him.
Zeus’ son Apollo made his voice like that of Lykaon
Priam’s son, and assumed his appearance, and spoke to Aineias:
“Aineias, lord of the Trojans’ counsels. Where are those threats gone
which as you drank your wine you made before Troy’s kings, solemnly,
85 that you would match your battle strength with Peleian Achilleus?”
In turn Aineias spoke to him in answer: “Lykaon
son of Priam, why do you urge me on against my will
to fight in the face of Peleus’ son and his too great fury?
Since this will not be the first time I stand up against swift-footed
90 Achilleus, but another time before now he drove me
with the spear from Ida, when he came there after our cattle
the time he sacked Lyrnessos and Pedasos. But Zeus rescued me
when he put strength inside me and made my knees quick. Otherwise
I should have gone down at Achilleus’ hands, and those of Athene

95 who goes before him and makes light before him, who then was urging
him on with the brazen spear to destroy Leleges and Trojans.
Thereby it is not for any man to fight with Achilleus.
There is always some one of the gods with him to beat death from him.
Without this, even, his spear wings straight to its mark, nor gives out
100 until it has gone through a man’s body. But if the god only
would pull out even the issue of war, he would not so easily
win, not even though he claims to be made all of bronze.”
In turn the lord the son of Zeus Apollo spoke to him:
“Hero, then make your prayer, you also, to the everlasting
105 gods, since they say that you yourself are born of Zeus’ daughter
Aphrodite, but Achilleus was born of a lesser goddess,
Aphrodite being daughter of Zeus, Thetis of the sea’s ancient.
Carry your weariless bronze straight against him, let him by no means
turn you back by blustering words and his threats of terror.”
110
So speaking, he inspired enormous strength in the shepherd of the
people,
who strode on his way among the champions helmed in the bright
bronze,
nor did Hera of the white arms fail to see the son of Anchises
as he went through the thronging men to face the son of Peleus,
and drew the other immortals about her and spoke to them, saying:
115 “Poseidon and Athene, now take counsel between you
and within your hearts as to how these matters shall be accomplished.
Here is Aineias gone helmed in the shining bronze against
Peleus’ son, and it was Phoibos Apollo who sent him.
Come then, we must even go down ourselves and turn him
120 back from here, or else one of us must stand by Achilleus
and put enormous strength upon him, and let him not come short
in courage, but let him know that they love him who are the highest
of the immortals, but those who before now fended the fury
of war, as now, from the Trojans are as wind and nothing.
125 For all of us have come down from Olympos to take our part
in this battle, so nothing may be done to him by the Trojans
on this day. Afterward he shall suffer such things as Destiny
wove with the strand of his birth that day he was born to his mother.

But if Achilleus does not hear all this from gods’ voices
130 he will be afraid, when a god puts out his strength against him
in the fighting. It is hard for gods to be shown in their true shape.”
In turn Poseidon the shaker of the earth answered her:
“Hera, do not be angry without purpose. It does not
become you, since I at least would not have the rest of us gods
135 encounter in battle, since indeed we are far too strong for them.
Let us then go away and sit down together off the path
at a viewing place, and let the men take care of their fighting.
Only if Ares begins to fight, or Phoibos Apollo,
or if they hold Achilleus back and will not let him fight,
140 then at once they will have a quarrel with us on their hands
in open battle. But soon, I think, when they have fought with us
they will get back to Olympos and the throng of the other gods
beaten back by the overmastering strength of our hands.”
So he spoke, Poseidon of the dark hair, and led the way
145 to the stronghold of godlike Herakles, earth-piled on both sides,
a high place, which the Trojans and Pallas Athene had built him
as a place of escape where he could get away from the Sea Beast
when the charging monster drove him away to the plain from the
seashore.
There Poseidon and the gods who were with him sat down
150 and gathered a breakless wall of cloud to darken their shoulders;
while they of the other side sat down on the brows of the sweet bluffs
around you, lord Apollo, and Ares sacker of cities.
So they on either side took their places, deliberating
counsels, reluctant on both sides to open the sorrowful
155 attack. But Zeus sitting on high above urged them on.
But all the plain was filled and shining with bronze of the mortals,
their men and horses, and underneath their feet the earth staggered
as they swept together. Two men far greater than all the others
were coming to encounter, furious to fight with each other,
160 Aineias, the son of Anchises, and brilliant Achilleus.
First of the two Aineias had strode forth in menace, tossing

his head beneath the heavy helm, and he held the stark shield
in front of his chest, and shook the brazen spear. From the other
side the son of Peleus rose like a lion against him,
165 the baleful beast, when men have been straining to kill him, the county
all in the hunt, and he at the first pays them no attention
but goes his way, only when some one of the impetuous young men
has hit him with the spear he whirls, jaws open, over his teeth foam
breaks out, and in the depth of his chest the powerful heart groans;
170 he lashes his own ribs with his tail and the flanks on both sides
as he rouses himself to fury for the fight, eyes glaring,
and hurls himself straight onward on the chance of killing some one
of the men, or else being killed himself in the first onrush.
So the proud heart and fighting fury stirred on Achilleus
175 to go forward in the face of great-hearted Aineias.
Now as these in their advance had come close to each other
first of the two to speak was swift-footed brilliant Achilleus:
“Aineias, why have you stood so far forth from the multitude
against me? Does the desire in your heart drive you to combat
180 in hope you will be lord of the Trojans, breakers of horses,
and of Priam’s honor? And yet even if you were to kill me
Priam would not because of that rest such honor on your hand.
He has sons, and he himself is sound, not weakened.
Or have the men of Troy promised you a piece of land, surpassing
185 all others, fine ploughland and orchard for you to administer
if you kill me? But I think that killing will not be easy.
Another time before this, I tell you, you ran from my spear.
Or do you not remember when, apart from your cattle, I caught you
alone, and chased you in the speed of your feet down the hills of Ida
190 headlong, and that time as you ran you did not turn to look back.
Then you got away into Lyrnessos, but I went after you
and stormed that place, with the help of Athene and of Zeus father,
and took the day of liberty away from their women
and led them as spoil, but Zeus and the other gods saved you.
195 I think they will not save you now, as your expectation
tells you they will. No, but I myself urge you to get back
into the multitude, not stand to face me, before you

take some harm. Once a thing has been done, the fool sees it.”
Then in turn Aineias spoke to him and made his answer:
200 “Son of Peleus, never hope by words to frighten me
as if I were a baby. I myself understand well enough
how to speak in vituperation and how to make insults.
You and I know each other’s birth, we both know our parents
since we have heard the lines of their fame from mortal men; only
205 I have never with my eyes seen your parents, nor have you seen mine.
For you, they say you are the issue of blameless Peleus
and that your mother was Thetis of the lovely hair, the sea’s lady;
I in turn claim I am the son of great-hearted Anchises
but that my mother was Aphrodite; and that of these parents
210 one group or the other will have a dear son to mourn for
this day. Since I believe we will not in mere words, like children,
meet, and separate and go home again out of the fighting.
Even so, if you wish to learn all this and be certain
of my genealogy: there are plenty of men who know it.
215 First of all Zeus who gathers the clouds had a son, Dardanos
who founded Dardania, since there was yet no sacred Ilion
made a city in the plain to be a center of peoples,
but they lived yet in the underhills of Ida with all her waters.
Dardanos in turn had a son, the king, Erichthonios,
220 who became the richest of mortal men, and in his possession
were three thousand horses who pastured along the low grasslands,
mares in their pride with their young colts; and with these the North
Wind
fell in love as they pastured there, and took on upon him
the likeness of a dark-maned stallion, and coupled with them,
225 and the mares conceiving of him bore to him twelve young horses.
Those, when they would play along the grain-giving tilled land
would pass along the tassels of corn and not break the divine yield,
but again, when they played across the sea’s wide ridges
they would run the edge of the wave where it breaks on the gray salt
water.
230 Erichthonios had a son, Tros, who was lord of the Trojans,
and to Tros in turn there were born three sons unfaulted,

Ilos and Assarakos and godlike Ganymedes
who was the loveliest born of the race of mortals, and therefore
the gods caught him away to themselves, to be Zeus’ wine-pourer,
235 for the sake of his beauty, so he might be among the immortals.
Ilos in turn was given a son, the blameless Laomedon,
and Laomedon had sons in turn, Tithonos and Priam,
Lampos, Klytios and Hiketaon, scion of Ares;
but Assarakos had Kapys, and Kapys’ son was Anchises,
240 and I am Anchises’ son, and Priam’s is Hektor the brilliant.
Such is the generation and blood I claim to be born from.
Zeus builds up and Zeus diminishes the strength in men,
the way he pleases, since his power is beyond all others’.
But come, let us no longer stand here talking of these things
245 like children, here in the space between the advancing armies.
For there are harsh things enough that could be spoken against us
both, a ship of a hundred locks could not carry the burden.
The tongue of man is a twisty thing, there are plenty of words there
of every kind, the range of words is wide, and their variance.
250 The sort of thing you say is the thing that will be said to you.
But what have you and I to do with the need for squabbling
and hurling insults at each other, as if we were two wives
who when they have fallen upon a heart-perishing quarrel
go out in the street and say abusive things to each other,
255 much true, and much that is not, and it is their rage that drives them.
You will not by talking turn me back from the strain of my warcraft,
not till you have fought to my face with the bronze. Come on then
and let us try each other’s strength with the bronze of our spearheads.”
He spoke, and on the terrible grim shield drove the ponderous
260 pike, so that the great shield moaned as it took the spearhead.
The son of Peleus with his heavy hand held the shield away
from him, in fright, since he thought the far-shadowing spear
of great-hearted Aineias would lightly be driven through it.
Fool, and the heart and spirit in him could not understand
265 how the glorious gifts of the gods are not easily broken
by mortal men, how such gifts will not give way before them.

Nor this time could the ponderous spear of war-wise Aineias
smash the shield, since the gold stayed it, the god’s gift. Indeed
he did drive the spear through two folds, but there were three left
270 still, since the god of the dragging feet had made five folds on it,
two of bronze on the outside and on the inside two of tin
and between them the single gold, and in this the ash spear was held
fast.
After him Achilleus let go his spear far shadowing
and struck the shield of Aineias along its perfect circle
275 at the utter rim where the circle of bronze ran thinnest about it
and the oxhide was laid thinnest there. The Pelian ash spear
crashed clean through it there, and the shield cried out as it went
through.
Aineias shrank down and held the shield away and above him
in fright, and the spear went over his back and crashed its way
280 to the ground, and fixed there, after tearing apart two circles
of the man-covering shield. But Aineias, free of the long spear,
stood still, and around his eyes gathered the enormous emotion
and fear, that the weapon had fixed so close to him. Now Achilleus
drew his tearing sword and swept in fury upon him
285 crying a terrible cry, but Aineias now in his hand caught
up a stone, a huge thing which no two men could carry
such as men are now, but by himself he lightly hefted it.
And there Aineias would have hit him with the stone as he swept in,
on helm or shield, which would have fended the bitter death from him,
290 and Peleus’ son would have closed with the sword and stripped the life
from him,
had not the shaker of the earth Poseidon sharply perceived all
and immediately spoken his word out among the immortals:
“Ah me; I am full of sorrow for great-hearted Aineias
who must presently go down to death, overpowered by Achilleus,
295 because he believed the words of Apollo, the far ranging;
poor fool, since Apollo will do nothing to keep grim death from him.
But why does this man, who is guiltless, suffer his sorrows
for no reason, for the sake of others’ unhappiness, and always
he gives gifts that please them to the gods who hold the wide heaven.

300 But come, let us ourselves get him away from death, for fear
the son of Kronos may be angered if now Achilleus
kills this man. It is destined that he shall be the survivor,
that the generation of Dardanos shall not die, without seed
obliterated, since Dardanos was dearest to Kronides
305 of all his sons that have been born to him from mortal women.
For Kronos’ son has cursed the generation of Priam,
and now the might of Aineias shall be lord over the Trojans,
and his sons’ sons, and those who are born of their seed hereafter.”
In turn the lady of the ox eyes, Hera, answered him:
310 “Shaker of the earth, you yourself must decide in your own heart
about Aineias, whether to rescue him or to let him
go down, for all his strength, before Peleus’ son, Achilleus.
For we two, Pallas Athene and I, have taken
numerous oaths and sworn them in the sight of all the immortals
315 never to drive the day of evil away from the Trojans,
not even when all the city of Troy is burned in the ravening
fire, on that day when the warlike sons of the Achaians burn it.”
When he had heard this, the shaker of the earth Poseidon
went on his way through the confusion of spears and the fighting,
320 and came to where Aineias was, and renowned Achilleus.
There quickly he drifted a mist across the eyes of one fighter,
Achilleus, Peleus’ son, and from the shield of Aineias
of the great heart pulled loose the strong bronze-headed ash spear
and laid it down again before the feet of Achilleus;
325 but Aineias he lifted high from the ground, and slung him through the
air
so that many ranks of fighting men, many ranks of horses,
were overvaulted by Aineias, hurled by the god’s hand.
He landed at the uttermost edge of the tossing battle
330 where the Kaukonians were arming them for the order of fighting.
And Poseidon, shaker of the earth, came and stood very near him
and spoke to him and addressed him in winged words: “Aineias,
which one of the gods is it who urges you to such madness
that you fight in the face of Peleus’ son, against his high courage

335 though he is both stronger than you and dearer to the immortals?
Give back rather, whenever you find yourself thrown against him,
lest beyond your fate you go down into the house of the death god.
But once Achilleus has fulfilled his death and his destiny,
then take courage, and go on, and fight with their foremost,
340 since there shall be no other Achaian able to kill you.”
He spoke, and left him there, when he had told him all this,
and at once scattered the mist away from the eyes of Achilleus
that the gods had sent, and now he looked with his eyes, and saw
largely,
and in disgust spoke then to his own great-hearted spirit:
345 “Can this be? Here is a strange thing I see with my own eyes.
Here is my spear lying on the ground, but I can no longer
see the man, whom I was charging in fury to kill him.
Aineias was then one beloved of the immortal
gods. I thought what he said was ineffectual boasting.
350 Let him go. He will not again have daring to try me
in battle, since even now he was glad to escape my onset.
Come! I must urge on the Danaäns whose delight is in battle
and go on to face the rest of the Trojans, and see what they can do.”
He spoke, and leapt back into the ranks, and urged each man on:
355 “No longer stand away from the Trojans, O great Achaians,
but let each one go to face his man, furious to fight him.
It is a hard thing for me, for all my great strength, to harry
the flight of men in such numbers or to fight with all of them.
Not Ares, who is a god immortal, not even Athene
360 could take the edge of such masses of men and fight a way through
them.
But what I can do with hands and feet and strength I tell you
I will do, and I shall not hang back even a little
but go straight on through their formation, and I think that no man
of the Trojans will be glad when he comes within my spear’s range.”
He spoke, urging them on, but glorious Hektor called out
365 in a great voice to the Trojans, and was minded to face Achilleus:
“Do not be afraid of Peleion, O high-hearted Trojans.
I myself could fight in words against the immortals,

but with the spear it were hard, since they are far stronger than we are.
Even Achilleus will not win achievement of everything
370 he says. Part he will accomplish, but part shall be baulked halfway
done.
I am going to stand against him now, though his hands are like flame,
though his hands are like flame, and his heart like the shining of iron.”
He spoke, urging the Trojans, and they lifted their spears to face
them.
Their fury gathered into bulk and their battle cry rose up.
375 But now Phoibos Apollo stood by Hektor and spoke to him:
“Hektor, do not go out all alone to fight with Achilleus,
but wait for him in the multitude and out of the carnage
lest he hit you with the spear or the stroke of the sword from close in.”
He spoke, and Hektor plunged back into the swarm of the fighting
380 men, in fear, when he heard the voice of the god speaking.
But Achilleus, gathering the fury upon him, sprang on the Trojans
with a ghastly cry, and the first of them he killed was Iphition
the great son of Otrynteus and a lord over numbers of people,
born of a naiad nymph to Otrynteus, sacker of cities,
385 under the snows of Tmolos in the rich countryside of Hydē.
Great Achilleus struck him with the spear as he came in fury,
in the middle of the head, and all the head broke into two pieces.
He fell, thunderously. Great Achilleus vaunted above him:
“Lie there, Otrynteus’ son, most terrifying of all men.
390 Here is your death, but your generation was by the lake waters
of Gyge, where is the allotted land of your fathers
by fish-swarming Hyllos and the whirling waters of Hermos.”
He spoke, vaunting, but darkness shrouded the eyes of the other,
and the running-rims of Achaian chariots cut him to pieces
395 in the van of the onrush. Next, after him, facing Demoleon
lord defender of battle and son of Antenor, Achilleus
stabbed him in the temple through the brazen sides of the helmet,
and the brazen helmet could not hold, but the bronze spearhead
driven on through smashed the bone apart, and the inward
400 brain was all spattered forth. So he beat him down in his fury.

Next he stabbed with a spear-stroke in the back Hippodamas
as he fled away before him and sprang from behind his horses.
He blew his life away, bellowing, as when a bull
bellows as he is dragged for Poseidon, lord of Helikē,
405 and the young men drag him. In such bulls the earth shaker glories.
Such was his bellowing as the proud spirit flitted from his bones.
Next he went with the spear after godlike Polydoros,
Priam’s son, whom his father would not let go into battle
because he was youngest born of all his sons to him, and also
410 the most beloved, and in speed of his feet outpassed all the others.
But now, in his young thoughtlessness and display of his running
he swept among the champions until thus he destroyed his dear life.
For as he shot by swift-footed brilliant Achilleus hit him
with a spear thrown in the middle of the back where the clasps of the
war belt
415 were golden and came together at the joining halves of the corselet.
The spearhead held its way straight on and came out by the navel,
and he dropped, moaning, on one knee as the dark mist gathered
about him, and sagged, and caught with his hands at his bowels in front
of him.
But now when Hektor saw Polydoros, his own brother,
420 going limp to the ground and catching his bowels in his hands,
the mist closed about his eyes also, he could stand no longer
to turn there at a distance, but went out to face Achilleus
hefting his sharp spear, like a flame. Seeing him Achilleus
balanced his spear in turn, and called out to him, and challenged him:
425 “Here is the man who beyond all others has troubled my anger,
who slaughtered my beloved companion. Let us no longer
shrink away from each other along the edgeworks of battle.”
He spoke, and looking darkly at brilliant Hektor spoke to him:
“Come nearer, so that sooner you may reach your appointed
destruction.”
430 But with no fear Hektor of the shining helm answered him:
“Son of Peleus, never hope by words to frighten me
as if I were a baby. I myself understand well enough

how to speak in vituperation and how to make insults.
I know that you are great and that I am far weaker than you are.
435 Still, all this lies upon the knees of the gods; and it may be
that weaker as I am I might still strip the life from you
with a cast of the spear, since my weapon too has been sharp before
this.”
He spoke, and balanced the spear and let it fly. But Athene
blew against it and turned it back from renowned Achilleus
440 with an easy blast. It came back again to glorious Hektor
and dropped to the ground in front of his feet. Meanwhile Achilleus
made a furious charge against him, raging to kill him
with a terrible cry, but Phoibos Apollo caught up Hektor
easily, since he was a god, and wrapped him in thick mist.
445 Three times swift-footed brilliant Achilleus swept in against him
with the brazen spear. Three times his stroke went into the deep mist.
But as a fourth time, like something more than a man, he charged in,
Achilleus with a terrible cry called in winged words after him:
“Once again now you escaped death, dog. And yet the evil
450 came near you, but now once more Phoibos Apollo has saved you,
he to whom you must pray when you go into the thunder of spears
thrown.
Yet I may win you, if I encounter you ever hereafter,
if beside me also there is some god who will help me.
Now I must chase whoever I can overtake of the others.”

455

He spoke, and with the spear full in the neck stabbed Dryops
so that he dropped in front of his feet. He left him to lie there
and with a spear thrown against the knee stopped the charge of
Demouchos,
Philetor’s son, a huge man and powerful. After the spearcast
460 with an inward plunge of the great sword he took the life from him.
Then Achilleus swooping on Dardanos and Laogonos, sons both
of Bias, dashed them to the ground from behind their horses,
one with a spearcast, one with a stroke of the sword from close up.

Now Tros, Alastor’s son: he had come up against Achilleus’
465 knees, to catch them and be spared and his life given to him
if Achilleus might take pity upon his youth and not kill him;
fool, and did not see there would be no way to persuade him,
since this was a man with no sweetness in his heart, and not kindly
but in a strong fury; now Tros with his hands was reaching
470 for the knees, bent on supplication, but he stabbed with his sword at
the liver
so that the liver was torn from its place, and from it the black blood
drenched the fold of his tunic and his eyes were shrouded in darkness
as the life went. Next from close in he thrust at Moulios
with the pike at the ear, so the bronze spearhead pushed through and
came out
475 at the other ear. Now he hit Echeklos the son of Agenor
with the hilted sword, hewing against his head in the middle
so all the sword was smoking with blood, and over both eyes
closed the red death and the strong destiny. Now Deukalion
was struck in the arm, at a place in the elbow where the tendons
480 come together. There through the arm Achilleus transfixed him
with the bronze spearhead, and he, arm hanging heavy, waited
and looked his death in the face. Achilleus struck with the sword’s edge
at his neck, and swept the helmed head far away, and the marrow
gushed from the neckbone, and he went down to the ground at full
length.
485 Now he went on after the blameless son of Peires,
Rhigmos, who had come over from Thrace where the soil is rich. This
man
he stabbed in the middle with the spear, and the spear stuck fast in his
belly.
He dropped from the chariot, but as Areïthoös his henchman
turned the horses away Achilleus stabbed him with the sharp spear
in the back, and thrust him from the chariot. And the horses bolted.

490

As inhuman fire sweeps on in fury through the deep angles

of a drywood mountain and sets ablaze the depth of the timber
and the blustering wind lashes the flame along, so Achilleus
swept everywhere with his spear like something more than a mortal
harrying them as they died, and the black earth ran blood.
495 Or as when a man yokes male broad-foreheaded oxen
to crush white barley on a strong-laid threshing floor, and rapidly
the barley is stripped beneath the feet of the bellowing oxen,
so before great-hearted Achilleus the single-foot horses
trampled alike dead men and shields, and the axle under
500 the chariot was all splashed with blood and the rails which encircled
the chariot, struck by flying drops from the feet of the horses,
from the running rims of the wheels. The son of Peleus was straining
to win glory, his invincible hands spattered with bloody filth.

BOOK TWENTY-ONE

5

10

15

20

25

But when they came to the crossing place of the fair-running river
of whirling Xanthos, a stream whose father was Zeus the immortal,
there Achilleus split them and chased some back over the flat land
toward the city, where the Achaians themselves had stampeded in terror
on the day before, when glorious Hektor was still in his fury.
Along this ground they were streaming in flight; but Hera let fall
a deep mist before them to stay them. Meanwhile the other half
were crowded into the silvery whirls of the deep-running river
and tumbled into it in huge clamor, and the steep-running water
sounded, and the banks echoed hugely about them, as they out-crying
tried to swim this way and that, spun about in the eddies.
As before the blast of a fire the locusts escaping
into a river swarm in air, and the fire unwearied
blazes from a sudden start, and the locusts huddle in water;
so before Achilleus the murmuring waters of Xanthos
the deep-whirling were filled with confusion of men and of horses.
But heaven-descended Achilleus left his spear there on the bank
leaning against the tamarisks, and leapt in like some immortal,
with only his sword, but his heart was bent upon evil actions,
and he struck in a circle around him. The shameful sound of their
groaning
rose as they were struck with the sword, and the water was reddened
with blood. As before a huge-gaping dolphin the other fishes
escaping cram the corners of a deepwater harbor
in fear, for he avidly eats up any he can catch;
so the Trojans along the course of the terrible river
shrank under the bluffs. He, when his hands grew weary with killing,
chose out and took twelve young men alive from the river

to be vengeance for the death of Patroklos, the son of Menoitios.
These, bewildered with fear like fawns, he led out of the water
30 and bound their hands behind them with thongs well cut out of leather,
with the very belts they themselves wore on their ingirt tunics,
and gave them to his companions to lead away to the hollow ships,
then himself whirled back, still in a fury to kill men.
And there he came upon a son of Dardanian Priam
35 as he escaped from the river, Lykaon, one whom he himself
had taken before and led him unwilling from his father’s gardens
on a night foray. He with the sharp bronze was cutting young branches
from a fig tree, so that they could make him rails for a chariot,
when an unlooked-for evil thing came upon him, the brilliant
40 Achilleus, who that time sold him as slave in strong-founded Lemnos
carrying him there by ship, and the son of Jason paid for him;
from there a guest and friend who paid a great price redeemed him,
Eëtion of Imbros, and sent him to shining Arisbe;
and from there he fled away and came to the house of his father.
45 For eleven days he pleasured his heart with friends and family
after he got back from Lemnos, but on the twelfth day once again
the god cast him into the hands of Achilleus, who this time
was to send him down unwilling on his way to the death god.
Now as brilliant swift-footed Achilleus saw him and knew him
50 naked and without helm or shield, and he had no spear left
but had thrown all these things on the ground, being weary and
sweating
with the escape from the river, and his knees were beaten with
weariness,
disturbed, Achilleus spoke to his own great-hearted spirit:
“Can this be? Here is a strange thing that my eyes look on.
55 Now the great-hearted Trojans, even those I have killed already,
will stand and rise up again out of the gloom and the darkness
as this man has come back and escaped the day without pity
though he was sold into sacred Lemnos; but the main of the gray sea
could not hold him, though it holds back many who are unwilling.
60 But come now, he must be given a taste of our spearhead

65

70

75

80

85

90

95

so that I may know inside my heart and make certain
whether he will come back even from there, or the prospering
earth will hold him, she who holds back even the strong man.”
So he pondered, waiting, and the other in terror came near him
in an agony to catch at his knees, and the wish in his heart was
to get away from the evil death and the dark fate. By this
brilliant Achilleus held the long spear uplifted above him
straining to stab, but he under-ran the stroke and caught him
by the knees, bending, and the spear went over his back and stood fast
in the ground, for all its desire to tear a man’s flesh. Lykaon
with one hand had taken him by the knees in supplication
and with the other held and would not let go of the edged spear
and spoke aloud to him and addressed him in winged words:
“Achilleus,
I am at your knees. Respect my position, have mercy upon me.
I am in the place, illustrious, of a suppliant who must be honored,
for you were the first beside whom I tasted the yield of Demeter
on that day you captured me in the strong-laid garden
and took me away from my father and those near me, and sold me
away into sacred Lemnos, and a hundred oxen I fetched you.
My release was ransom three times as great; and this is
the twelfth dawn since I came back to Ilion, after
much suffering. Now again cursed destiny has put me
in your hands; and I think I must be hated by Zeus the father
who has given me once more to you, and my mother bore me
to a short life, Laothoë, daughter of aged Altes,
Altes, lord of the Leleges, whose delight is in battle,
and holds headlong Pedasos on the river Satnioeis.
His daughter was given to Priam, who had many wives beside her.
We are two who were born to her. You will have cut the throats
of both, since one you beat down in the forefront of the foot-fighters,
Polydoros the godlike, with a cast of the sharp spear. This time
the evil shall be mine in this place, since I do not think
I shall escape your hands, since divinity drove me against them.
Still, put away in your heart this other thing I say to you.
Do not kill me. I am not from the same womb as Hektor,

he who killed your powerful and kindly companion.”
So the glorious son of Priam addressed him, speaking
in supplication, but heard in turn the voice without pity:
“Poor fool, no longer speak to me of ransom, nor argue it.
100 In the time before Patroklos came to the day of his destiny
then it was the way of my heart’s choice to be sparing
of the Trojans, and many I took alive and disposed of them.
Now there is not one who can escape death, if the gods send
him against my hands in front of Ilion, not one
105 of all the Trojans and beyond others the children of Priam.
So, friend, you die also. Why all this clamor about it?
Patroklos also is dead, who was better by far than you are.
Do you not see what a man I am, how huge, how splendid
and born of a great father, and the mother who bore me immortal?
110 Yet even I have also my death and my strong destiny,
and there shall be a dawn or an afternoon or a noontime
when some man in the fighting will take the life from me also
either with a spearcast or an arrow flown from the bowstring.”
So he spoke, and in the other the knees and the inward
115 heart went slack. He let go of the spear and sat back, spreading
wide both hands; but Achilleus drawing his sharp sword struck him
beside the neck at the collar-bone, and the double-edged sword
plunged full length inside. He dropped to the ground, face downward,
and lay at length, and the black blood flowed, and the ground was
soaked with it.
120 Achilleus caught him by the foot and slung him into the river
to drift, and spoke winged words of vaunting derision over him:
“Lie there now among the fish, who will lick the blood away
from your wound, and care nothing for you, nor will your mother
lay you on the death-bed and mourn over you, but Skamandros
125 will carry you spinning down to the wide bend of the salt water.
And a fish will break a ripple shuddering dark on the water
as he rises to feed upon the shining fat of Lykaon.
Die on, all; till we come to the city of sacred Ilion,
you in flight and I killing you from behind; and there will not
130 be any rescue for you from your silvery-whirled strong-running

river, for all the numbers of bulls you dedicate to it
and drown single-foot horses alive in its eddies. And yet
even so, die all an evil death, till all of you
pay for the death of Patroklos and the slaughter of the Achaians
135 whom you killed beside the running ships, when I was not with them.”

He spoke, but the anger was rising now in the heart of the river
and he pondered in his heart as to how he could stop the labor
of brilliant Achilleus, and fend destruction away from the Trojans.
And now with the spear far shadowing in his hands Peleus’ son
140 was springing, furious to kill him, on Asteropaios
the son of Pelegon; who in turn was born of the wide-running river
Axios, and of Periboia, eldest of the daughters
of Akessamenos, for she lay in love with the deep-whirling river.
Against this man Achilleus rose up, and he came out to face him
145 from the river, holding two spears, for Xanthos had inspired valor
into his heart, in anger for the slaughter of the young men
whom Achilleus had slain beside his waters and taken no pity.
Now as these two in their advance encountered together
first of the two to speak was swift-footed brilliant Achilleus:
150 “What man are you, and whence, who dare stand up to my onset?
Since unhappy are those whose sons match warcraft against me.”
Then in turn the glorious son of Pelegon answered him:
“High-hearted son of Peleus, why ask of my generation?
I am from Paionia far away, where the soil is generous,
155 and lead the men of Paionia with long spears; and this for me
is the eleventh day since I arrived in Ilion.
For my generation, it is from the broad waters of Axios,
Axios, who floods the land with the loveliest waters.
His son was Pelegon the spear-famed; but men say I am Pelegon’s
160 son; now, glorious Achilleus, we shall fight together.”
So he spoke, challenging, and brilliant Achilleus uplifted
the Pelian ash spear, but the warrior Asteropaios
threw with both spears at the same time, being ambidextrous.

With the one spear he hit the shield but could not altogether
165 break through the shield, since the gold stayed it that the god had
given.
With the other spear he struck Achilleus on the right forearm
and grazed it so that the blood gushed out in a dark cloud, and the spear
overpassed him and fixed in the ground, straining to reach his body.
Throwing second Achilleus let fly at Asteropaios
170 with the straight-flying ash spear in a fury to kill him,
but missed his man and hit the high bank, so that the ash spear
was driven half its length and stuck in the bank of the river.
But the son of Peleus, drawing from beside his thigh the sharp sword,
sprang upon him in fury; and Asteropaios could not
175 with his heavy hand wrench Achilleus’ ash spear free of the riverbank.
Three times he struggled straining to wrench it clear, and three times
gave over the effort, and now for the fourth time he was bending
over the ash spear of Aiakides, trying to break it,
but before this Achilleus took his life with the sword from close up
180 for he struck him in the belly next the navel, and all his guts poured
out on the ground, and a mist of darkness closed over both eyes
as he gasped life out, and springing upon his chest Achilleus
stripped his armor away and spoke in triumph above him:
“Lie so: it is hard even for those sprung of a river
185 to fight against the children of Kronos, whose strength is almighty.
You said you were of the generation of the wide-running river,
but I claim that I am of the generation of great Zeus.
The man is my father who is lord over many Myrmidons,
Peleus, Aiakos’ son, but Zeus was the father of Aiakos.
190 And as Zeus is stronger than rivers that run to the sea, so
the generation of Zeus is made stronger than that of a river.
For here is a great river beside you, if he were able
to help; but it is not possible to fight Zeus, son of Kronos.
Not powerful Acheloios matches his strength against Zeus,
195 not the enormous strength of Ocean with his deep-running waters,
Ocean, from whom all rivers are and the entire sea
and all springs and all deep wells have their waters of him, yet

even Ocean is afraid of the lightning of great Zeus
and the dangerous thunderbolt when it breaks from the sky crashing.”

200

So he spoke, and pulled the bronze spear free of the river bluff
and left him there, when he had torn the heart of life from him,
sprawled in the sands and drenched in the dark water. And about
Asteropaios the eels and the other fish were busy
tearing him and nibbling the fat that lay by his kidneys.
205 But Achilleus went on after the Paionians crested with horse-hair
who had scattered in fear along the banks of the eddying river
when they had seen their greatest man in the strong encounter
gone down by force under the sword and the hands of Peleïdes.
There he killed Thersilochos and Astypylos and Mydon,
210 Mnesos and Thrasios, and Ainios and Ophelestes.
Now swift Achilleus would have killed even more Paionians
except that the deep-whirling river spoke to him in anger
and in mortal likeness, and the voice rose from the depth of the eddies:
“O Achilleus, your strength is greater, your acts more violent
215 than all men’s; since always the very gods are guarding you.
If the son of Kronos has given all Trojans to your destruction,
drive them at least out of me to the plain, and there work your havoc.
For the loveliness of my waters is crammed with corpses, I cannot
find a channel to cast my waters into the bright sea
220 since I am congested with the dead men you kill so brutally.
Let me alone, then; lord of the people, I am confounded.”
Then in answer to him spoke Achilleus of the swift feet:
“All this, illustrious Skamandros, shall be as you order.
But I will not leave off my killing of the proud Trojans
225 until I have penned them inside their city, and attempted Hektor
strength against strength, until he has killed me or I have killed him.”

He spoke, and like something more than mortal swept down on the
Trojans.
And now the deep-whirling river called aloud to Apollo:
“Shame, lord of the silver bow, Zeus’ son; you have not kept
230 the counsels of Kronion, who very strongly ordered you
to stand by the Trojans and defend them, until the sun setting
at last goes down and darkens all the generous ploughland.”
He spoke: and spear-famed Achilleus leapt into the middle water
with a spring from the bluff, but the river in a boiling surge was upon
him
235 and rose making turbulent all his waters, and pushed off
the many dead men whom Achilleus had killed piled in abundance
in the stream; these, bellowing like a bull, he shoved out
on the dry land, but saved the living in the sweet waters
hiding them under the huge depths of the whirling current.
240 And about Achilleus in his confusion a dangerous wave rose
up, and beat against his shield and pushed it. He could not
brace himself with his feet, but caught with his hands at an elm tree
tall and strong grown, but this uptorn by the roots and tumbling
ripped away the whole cliff and with its dense tangle of roots stopped
245 the run of the lovely current and fallen full length in the water
dammed the very stream. Achilleus uprising out of the whirlpool
made a dash to get to the plain in the speed of his quick feet
in fear, but the great god would not let him be, but rose on him
in a darkening edge of water, minded to stop the labor
250 of brilliant Achilleus and fend destruction away from the Trojans.
The son of Peleus sprang away the length of a spearcast
running with the speed of the black eagle, the marauder
who is at once the strongest of flying things and the swift est.
In the likeness of this he sped away, on his chest the bronze armor
255 clashed terribly, and bending away to escape from the river
he fled, but the river came streaming after him in huge noise.
And as a man running a channel from a spring of dark water
guides the run of the water among his plants and his gardens
with a mattock in his hand and knocks down the blocks in the channel;
260 in the rush of the water all the pebbles beneath are torn loose

from place, and the water that has been dripping suddenly jets on
in a steep place and goes too fast even for the man who guides it;
so always the crest of the river was overtaking Achilleus
for all his speed of foot, since gods are stronger than mortals.
265 And every time swift-footed brilliant Achilleus would begin
to turn and stand and fight the river, and try to discover
if all the gods who hold the wide heaven were after him, every
time again the enormous wave of the sky-fed river
would strike his shoulders from above. He tried, in his desperation,
270 to keep a high spring with his feet, but the river was wearing his knees
out
as it ran fiercely beneath him and cut the ground from under
his feet. Peleïdes groaned aloud, gazing into the wide sky:
“Father Zeus, no god could endure to save me from the river
who am so pitiful. And what then shall become of me’?
275 It is not so much any other Uranian god who has done this
but my own mother who beguiled me with falsehoods, who told me
that underneath the battlements of the armored Trojans
I should be destroyed by the flying shafts of Apollo.
I wish now Hektor had killed me, the greatest man grown in this place.
280 A brave man would have been the slayer, as the slain was a brave man.
But now this is a dismal death I am doomed to be caught in,
trapped in a big river as if I were a boy and a swineherd
swept away by a torrent when he tries to cross in a rainstorm.”
So he spoke, and Poseidon and Athene swiftly came near him
285 and stood beside him with their shapes in the likeness of mortals
and caught him hand by hand and spoke to him in assurance.
First of them to speak was the shaker of the earth, Poseidon.
“Do not be afraid, son of Peleus, nor be so anxious,
such are we two of the gods who stand beside you to help you,
290 by the consent of Zeus, myself and Pallas Athene.
Thereby it is not your destiny to be killed by the river,
but he shall be presently stopped, and you yourself shall behold it.
“But we also have close counsel to give you, if you will believe us.
Do not let stay your hands from the collision of battle

295 until you have penned the people of Troy, those who escape you,
inside the famed wall of Ilion. Then when you have taken Hektor’s life
go back again to the ships. We grant you the winning of glory.”
So speaking the two went back again among the immortals,
but Achilleus went on, and the urgency of the gods strongly stirred him,
300 into the plain. But the river filled with an outrush of water
and masses of splendid armor from the young men who had perished
floated there, and their bodies, but against the hard drive of the river
straight on he kept a high spring with his feet, and the river wide
running
could not stop him now, since he was given great strength by Athene.
305 But Skamandros did not either abate his fury, but all the more
raged at Peleion, and high uplifting the wave of his waters
gathered it to a crest, and called aloud upon Simoeis:
“Beloved brother, let even the two of us join to hold back
the strength of a man, since presently he will storm the great city
310 of lord Priam. The Trojans cannot stand up to him in battle.
But help me beat him off with all speed, and make full your currents
with water from your springs, and rouse up all of your torrents
and make a big wave rear up and wake the heavy confusion
and sound of timbers and stones, so we can stop this savage man
315 who is now in his strength and rages in fury like the immortals.
For I say that his strength will not be enough for him nor his beauty
nor his arms in their splendor, which somewhere deep down under the
waters
shall lie folded under the mud; and I will whelm his own body
deep, and pile it over with abundance of sands and rubble
320 numberless, nor shall the Achaians know where to look for
his bones to gather them, such ruin will I pile over him.
And there shall his monument be made, and he will have no need
of any funeral mound to be buried in by the Achaians.”
He spoke, and rose against Achilleus, turbulent, boiling
325 to a crest, muttering in foam and blood and dead bodies
until the purple wave of the river fed from the bright sky

lifted high and caught in its waters the son of Peleus.
But Hera, greatly fearing for Achilleus, cried in a loud voice
lest he be swept away in the huge deep-eddying river,
330 and at once thereafter appealed to her own dear son, Hephaistos:
“Rise up, god of the dragging feet, my child; for we believe
that whirling Xanthos would be fit antagonist for you in battle.
Go now quickly to the help of Achilleus, make shine a great flame
while I raise up and bring in out of the sea a troublesome
335 storm of the west wind and the whitening south wind, a storm
that will burn the heads of the Trojans and burn their armor
carrying the evil flame, while you by the banks of Xanthos
set fire to the trees and throw fire on the river himself, and do not
by any means let him turn you with winning words or revilements.
340 Do not let your fury be stopped until such time as
I lift my voice and cry to you. Then stay your weariless burning.”
Hera spoke, and Hephaistos set on them an inhuman fire.
First he kindled a fire in the plain and burned the numerous
corpses that lay there in abundance, slain by Achilleus,
345 and all the plain was parched and the shining water was straitened.
As when the north wind of autumn suddenly makes dry
a garden freshly watered and makes glad the man who is tending it,
so the entire flat land was dried up with Hephaistos burning
the dead bodies. Then he turned his flame in its shining
350 into the river. The elms burned, the willows and tamarisks,
the clover burned and the rushes and the galingale, all those
plants that grew in abundance by the lovely stream of the river.
The eels were suffering and the fish in the whirl of the water
who leaped out along the lovely waters in every direction
355 in affliction under the hot blast of resourceful Hephaistos.
The strength of the river was burning away; he gave voice and called
out
by name: “Hephaistos, not one of the gods could stand up against you.
I for one could not fight the flame of a fire like this one.
Leave your attack. Brilliant Achilleus can capture the city
360 of the Trojans, now, for me. What have I to do with this quarrel?”

He spoke, blazing with fire, and his lovely waters were seething.
And as a cauldron that is propped over a great fire boils up
dancing on its whole circle with dry sticks burning beneath it
as it melts down the fat of swine made tender, so Xanthos’
365 lovely streams were burned with the fire, and the water was boiling
and would not flow along but was stopped under stress of the hot blast
strongly blown by resourceful Hephaistos. And now the river
cried out to Hera in the winged words of strong supplication:
“Hera, why did your son assault me to trouble my waters
370 beyond others? It is not so much I who have done anything against you
as all the rest of the gods who stand by to help the Trojans.
Now indeed I will leave off, if such is your order,
but let him leave off too, I will swear you a promise
not ever to drive the day of evil away from the Trojans,
375 not even when all the city of Troy is burned in the ravening
fire, on that day when the warlike sons of the Achaians burn it.”
Now when the goddess of the white arms, Hera, had heard this
immediately she spoke to her own dear son, Hephaistos:
“Hephaistos, hold, my glorious child, since it is not fitting
380 to batter thus an immortal god for the sake of mortals.”
So she spoke, and Hephaistos quenched his inhuman fire. Now
the lovely waters ran their ripples back in the channel.
But when the strength of Xanthos had been beaten, these two gods
rested, since Hera, for all she was still angry, restrained them.
385 But upon the other gods descended the wearisome burden
of hatred, and the wind of their fury blew from division,
and they collided with a grand crash, the broad earth echoing
and the huge sky sounded as with trumpets. Zeus heard it
from where he sat on Olympos, and was amused in his deep heart
390 for pleasure, as he watched the gods’ collision in conflict.
Thereafter they stood not long apart from each other, for Ares
began it, the shield-stabber, and rose up against Athene
with the brazen spear in his hand, and spoke a word of revilement:
“Why once more, you dogfly, have you stirred up trouble among the
gods

395 with the blast of your blown fury, and the pride of your heart driving
you?
Do you not remember how you set on Diomedes, Tydeus’
son, to spear me, and yourself laying hold of the far-seen pike
pushed it straight into me and tore my skin in its beauty.
So now I am minded to pay you back for all you have done me.”
400 He spoke, and stabbed against the ghastly aegis with fluttering
straps, which gives way not even before the bolt of Zeus’ lightning.
There blood-dripping Ares made his stab with the long spear,
but Athene giving back caught up in her heavy hand a stone
that lay in the plain, black and rugged and huge, one which men
405 of a former time had set there as boundary mark of the cornfield.
With this she hit furious Ares in the neck, and unstrung him.
He spread over seven acres in his fall, and his hair dragged
in the dust, and his armor clashed. But Pallas Athene laughing
stood above him and spoke to him in the winged words of triumph:
410 “You child; you did not think even this time how much stronger
I can claim I am than you, when you match your fury against me.
Therefore you are paying atonement to your mother’s furies
since she is angry and wishes you ill, because you abandoned
the Achaians, and have given your aid to the insolent Trojans.”

415

She spoke, and turned the shining of her eyes away. But taking
Ares by the hand the daughter of Zeus, Aphrodite,
led him away, groaning always, his strength scarce gathered back into
him.
But now, as the goddess of the white arms, Hera, noticed her
immediately she spoke to Pallas Athene her winged words:
420 “For shame now, Atrytone, daughter of Zeus of the aegis.
Here again is this dogfly leading murderous Ares
out of the fighting and through the confusion. Quick, go after her!
“She spoke, and Athene swept in pursuit, heart full of gladness,
and caught up with her and drove a blow at her breasts with her
ponderous

425 hand, so that her knees went slack and the heart inside her.
Those two both lay sprawled on the generous earth. But Athene
stood above them and spoke to them in the winged words of triumph:
“Now may all who bring their aid to the Trojans be in
such case as these, when they do battle with the armored Argives,
430 as daring and as unfortunate, as now Aphrodite
came companion in arms to Ares, and faced my fury.
So we should long ago have rested after our fighting
once having utterly stormed the strong-founded city of Ilion.”
She spoke, and the goddess of the white arms, Hera, smiled on her.
435 But now the powerful shaker of the earth spoke to Apollo:
“Phoibos, why do you and I stand yet apart. It does not suit
when the others have begun, and it were too shameful if without
fighting
we go back to the brazen house of Zeus on Olympos.
Begin, you; you are younger born than I; it is not well
440 for me to, since I am elder born than you, and know more.
Young fool, what a mindless heart you have. Can you not even
now remember all the evils we endured here by Ilion,
you and I alone of the gods, when to proud Laomedon
we came down from Zeus and for a year were his servants
445 for a stated hire, and he told us what to do, and to do it?
Then I built a wall for the Trojans about their city,
wide, and very splendid, so none could break into their city,
but you, Phoibos, herded his shambling horn-curved cattle
along the spurs of Ida with all her folds and her forests.
450 But when the changing seasons brought on the time for our labor
to be paid, then headstrong Laomedon violated and made void
all our hire, and sent us away, and sent threats after us.
For he threatened to hobble our feet and to bind our arms,
to carry us away for slaves in the far-lying islands.
455 He was even going to strip with bronze the ears from both of us.
Then you and I took our way back with hearts full of anger
and wrath for our hire which he promised us and would not accomplish
it.
Yet to his people you give now your grace, and you will not

try with us to bring destruction on the insolent Trojans
460 evil and complete, with their honored wives and their children.”
In turn the lord who strikes from afar, Apollo, answered him:
“Shaker of the earth, you would have me be as one without prudence
if I am to fight even you for the sake of insignificant
mortals, who are as leaves are, and now flourish and grow warm
465 with life, and feed on what the ground gives, but then again
fade away and are dead. Therefore let us with all speed
give up this quarrel and let the mortals fight their own battles.”
He spoke so and turned away, for he was too modest
to close and fight in strength of hand with his father’s brother.
470 But his sister, Artemis of the wild, the lady of wild beasts,
scolded him bitterly and spoke a word of revilement:
“You run from him, striker from afar. You have yielded Poseidon
the victory entire. He can brag, where nothing has happened.
Fool, then why do you wear that bow, which is wind and nothing.
475 Let me not hear you in the halls of my father boasting
ever again, as you did before among the immortals,
that you could match your strength in combat against Poseidon.”
So she spoke, but Apollo who strikes from afar said nothing
to her; but the august consort of Zeus, full of anger,
480 scolded the lady of showering arrows in words of revilement:
“How have you had the daring, you shameless hussy, to stand up
and face me? It will be hard for you to match your strength with mine
even if you wear a bow, since Zeus has made you a lion
among women, and given you leave to kill any at your pleasure.
485 Better for you to hunt down the ravening beasts in the mountains
and deer of the wilds, than try to fight in strength with your betters.
But if you would learn what fighting is, come on. You will find out
how much stronger I am when you try to match strength against me.”
She spoke, and caught both of her arms at the wrists in her left hand
490 and with her right hand stripped away the bow from her shoulders,
then with her own bow, smiling, boxed her ears as Artemis
tried to twist away, and the flying arrows were scattered.
She got under and free and fled in tears, as a pigeon
in flight from a hawk wings her way into some rock-hollow

495 and a cave, since it was not destiny for the hawk to catch her.
So she left her archery on the ground, and fled weeping.
Meanwhile the Guide, Argeïphontes, addressed him to Leto:
“Leto, I will not fight with you; since it is a hard thing
to come to blows with the brides of Zeus who gathers the clouds. No,
500 sooner you may freely speak among the immortal
gods, and claim that you were stronger than I, and beat me.”
So he spoke, but Leto picked up the curved bow and the arrows
which had fallen in the turn of the dust one way and another.
When she had taken up the bow she went back to her daughter.
505 But the maiden came to the bronze-founded house on Olympos
of Zeus, and took her place kneeling at the knees of her father
and the ambrosial veil trembled about her. Her father
Kronides caught her against him, and laughed softly, and questioned
her:
“Who now of the Uranian gods, dear child, has done such
510 things to you, rashly, as if you were caught doing something wicked?”
Artemis sweet-garlanded lady of clamors answered him:
“It was your wife, Hera of the white arms, who hit me,
father, since hatred and fighting have fastened upon the immortals.”
Now as these two were talking thus to each other, meanwhile
515 Phoibos Apollo went into the sacred city of Ilion,
since he was concerned for the wall of the strong-founded city
lest the Danaäns storm it on that day, before they were fated.
The rest of the gods who live forever went back to Olympos,
some in anger and others glorying greatly, and sat down
520 at the side of their father the dark-misted. Meanwhile Achilleus
was destroying alike the Trojans themselves and their single-foot
horses;
and as when smoke ascending goes up into the wide sky
from a burning city, with the anger of the gods let loose upon it
which inflicted labor upon them all, and sorrow on many,
525 so Achilleus inflicted labor and sorrow upon the Trojans.
The aged Priam had taken his place on the god-built bastion,
and looked out and saw gigantic Achilleus, where before him

the Trojans fled in the speed of their confusion, no war strength
left them. He groaned and descended to the ground from the bastion
530 and beside the wall set in motion the glorious guards of the gateway;
“Hold the gates wide open in your hands, so that our people
in their flight can get inside the city, for here is Achilleus
close by, stampeding them, and I think there will be disaster.
But once they are crowded inside the city and get wind again,
535 shut once more the door-leaves closely fitted together.
I am afraid this ruinous man may spring into our stronghold.”
He spoke, and they spread open the gates and shoved back the door
bars
and the gates opening let in daylight. Meanwhile Apollo
sprang out to meet them, so that he could fend off destruction
540 from the Trojans, who, straight for the city and the lift of the rampart
dusty from the plain and throats rugged with thirst, fled
away, and Achilleus followed fiercely with the spear, strong madness
forever holding his heart and violent after his glory.
There the sons of the Achaians might have taken gate-towering Ilion
545 had not Phoibos Apollo sent on them brilliant Agenor,
a man who was the son of Antenor, blameless and powerful.
He drove courage into his heart, and stood there beside him
in person, so as to beat the dragging death spirits from him,
and leaned there on an oak tree with close mist huddled about him.
550 When Agenor was aware of Achilleus, sacker of cities,
he stood fast, but the heart was a storm in him as he waited,
and deeply disturbed he spoke to his own great-hearted spirit:
“Ah me! If I run away before the strength of Achilleus
in the way that others are stampeded in terror before him,
555 he will catch me even so and cut my throat like a coward’s.
But if I leave these men to be driven in flight by Achilleus,
Peleus’ son, and run on my feet in another direction
away from the wall to the plain of Ilion, until I come to
the spurs of Ida, and take cover there within the undergrowth,
560 then in the evening, when I have bathed in the river, and washed off
the sweat, I could make my way back again to Ilion.

Yet still, why does the heart within me debate on these things?
This way, he might see me as I started to the plain from the city,
and go in pursuit, and in the speed of his feet overtake me.
565 Then there will be no way to escape death and the death spirits.
He is too strong, his strength is beyond all others’. But then if
I go out in front of the city and stand fast against him,
I think even his body might be torn by the sharp bronze.
There is only one life in him, and people say he is mortal.
570 It is only that Zeus, the son of Kronos, is granting him glory.”
He spoke, and gathered himself to await Achilleus, and in him
the fighting heart was urgent for the encounter of battle.
But as a leopard emerges out of her timbered cover
to face the man who is hunting her, and takes no terror
575 in her heart nor thought of flight when she hears them baying against
her;
and even though one be too quick for her with spear thrust or spear
thrown
stuck with the shaft though she be she will not give up her fighting
fury, till she has closed with one of them or is overthrown;
so the son of proud Antenor, brilliant Agenor,
580 was unwilling to run away until he had tested Achilleus,
but held the perfect circle of his shield in front of him,
and with the spear aimed at him and cried out in a great voice:
“You must have hoped within your heart, O shining Achilleus,
on this day to storm the city of the proud Trojans.
585 You fool! There is much hard suffering to be done for its winning,
since there are many of us inside, and men who are fighters,
who will stand before our beloved parents, our wives and our children,
to defend Ilion; but in this place you will find your destiny,
for all you are so headlong and so bold a warrior.”
590 He spoke, and from his heavy hand let fly with the sharp spear
and struck him in the leg below the knee, nor entirely
missed him, and taking the spear the greave of new-wrought tin
clattered
horribly, and back from the struck greave the bronze rebounded
without getting through, but the gift of the god defended Achilleus.

595 After him Peleus’ son made his spring at godlike Agenor,
but Apollo would no further grant him the winning of glory
but caught Agenor away closing him in a dense mist
and sent him to make his way quietly out of the battle.
Then by deception he kept Peleion away from the people.
600 The striker from afar likened himself in all ways to Agenor
and stood there before his feet, and Achilleus sprang in chase of him
in the speed of his feet; for the time he chased him across the wheatbearing
plain, turning him toward the deep whirls of the river Skamandros
as he ran a little in front; with the trick Apollo beguiled him
605 so that he hoped ever by running to catch up with him;
all this time the rest of the Trojans fled in a body
gladly into the town, and the city was filled with their swarming.
They dared no longer outside the wall and outside the city
to wait for each other and find out which one had got away
610 and who had died in the battle, so hastily were they streaming
into the city, each man as his knees and feet could rescue him.

BOOK TWENTY-TWO

5

10

15

20

25

So along the city the Trojans, who had run like fawns, dried
the sweat off from their bodies and drank and slaked their thirst,
leaning
along the magnificent battlements. Meanwhile the Achaians
sloping their shields across their shoulders came close to the rampart.
But his deadly fate held Hektor shackled, so that he stood fast
in front of Ilion and the Skaian gates. Now Phoibos
Apollo spoke aloud to Peleion: “Why, son of Peleus,
do you keep after me in the speed of your feet, being mortal
while I am an immortal god? Even yet you have not
seen that I am a god, but strain after me in your fury.
Now hard fighting with the Trojans whom you stampeded means
nothing
to you. They are crowded in the city, but you bent away here.
You will never kill me. I am not one who is fated.”
Deeply vexed Achilleus of the swift feet spoke to him:
“You have balked me, striker from afar, most malignant of all gods,
when you turned me here away from the rampart, else many Trojans
would have caught the soil in their teeth before they got back into Ilion.
Now you have robbed me of great glory, and rescued these people
lightly, since you have no retribution to fear hereafter.
Else I would punish you, if only the strength were in me.”
He spoke, and stalked away against the city, with high thoughts
in mind, and in tearing speed, like a racehorse with his chariot
who runs lightly as he pulls the chariot over the flat land.
Such was the action of Achilleus in feet and quick knees.
The aged Priam was the first of all whose eyes saw him
as he swept across the flat land in full shining, like that star

30

35

40

45

50

55

60

which comes on in the autumn and whose conspicuous brightness
far outshines the stars that are numbered in the night’s darkening,
the star they give the name of Orion’s Dog, which is brightest
among the stars, and yet is wrought as a sign of evil
and brings on the great fever for unfortunate mortals.
Such was the flare of the bronze that girt his chest in his running.
The old man groaned aloud and with both hands high uplifted
beat his head, and groaned amain, and spoke supplicating
his beloved son, who there still in front of the gateway
stood fast in determined fury to fight with Achilleus.
The old man stretching his hands out called pitifully to him:
“Hektor, beloved child, do not wait the attack of this man
alone, away from the others. You might encounter your destiny
beaten down by Peleion, since he is far stronger than you are.
A hard man: I wish he were as beloved of the immortal
as loved by me. Soon he would lie dead, and the dogs and the vultures
would eat him, and bitter sorrow so be taken from my heart.
He has made me desolate of my sons, who were brave and many.
He killed them, or sold them away among the far-lying islands.
Even now there are two sons, Lykaon and Polydoros,
whom I cannot see among the Trojans pent up in the city,
sons Laothoë a princess among women bore to me.
But if these are alive somewhere in the army, then I can
set them free for bronze and gold; it is there inside, since
Altes the aged and renowned gave much with his daughter.
But if they are dead already and gone down to the house of Hades,
it is sorrow to our hearts, who bore them, myself and their mother,
but to the rest of the people a sorrow that will be fleeting
beside their sorrow for you, if you go down before Achilleus.
Come then inside the wall, my child, so that you can rescue
the Trojans and the women of Troy, neither win the high glory
for Peleus’ son, and yourself be robbed of your very life. Oh, take
pity on me, the unfortunate still alive, still sentient
but ill-starred, whom the father, Kronos’ son, on the threshold of old
age
will blast with hard fate, after I have looked upon evils

and seen my sons destroyed and my daughters dragged away captive
and the chambers of marriage wrecked and the innocent children taken
and dashed to the ground in the hatefulness of war, and the wives
65 of my sons dragged off by the accursed hands of the Achaians.
And myself last of all, my dogs in front of my doorway
will rip me raw, after some man with stroke of the sharp bronze
spear, or with spearcast, has torn the life out of my body;
those dogs I raised in my halls to be at my table, to guard my
70 gates, who will lap my blood in the savagery of their anger
and then lie down in my courts. For a young man all is decorous
when he is cut down in battle and torn with the sharp bronze, and lies
there
dead, and though dead still all that shows about him is beautiful;
but when an old man is dead and down, and the dogs mutilate
75 the gray head and the gray beard and the parts that are secret,
this, for all sad mortality, is the sight most pitiful.”

80

85

90

95

So the old man spoke, and in his hands seizing the gray hairs
tore them from his head, but could not move the spirit in Hektor.
And side by side with him his mother in tears was mourning
and laid the fold of her bosom bare and with one hand held out
a breast, and wept her tears for him and called to him in winged words:
“Hektor, my child, look upon these and obey, and take pity
on me, if ever I gave you the breast to quiet your sorrow.
Remember all these things, dear child, and from inside the wall
beat off this grim man. Do not go out as champion against him,
O hard one; for if he kills you I can no longer
mourn you on the death-bed, sweet branch, O child of my bearing,
nor can your generous wife mourn you, but a big way from us
beside the ships of the Argives the running dogs will feed on you.”
So these two in tears and with much supplication called out
to their dear son, but could not move the spirit in Hektor,
but he awaited Achilleus as he came on, gigantic.
But as a snake waits for a man by his hole, in the mountains,
glutted with evil poisons, and the fell venom has got inside him,
and coiled about the hole he stares malignant, so Hektor

would not give ground but kept unquenched the fury within him
and sloped his shining shield against the jut of the bastion.
Deeply troubled he spoke to his own great-hearted spirit:
“Ah me! If I go now inside the wall and the gateway,
100 Poulydamas will be first to put a reproach upon me,
since he tried to make me lead the Trojans inside the city
on that accursed night when brilliant Achilleus rose up,
and I would not obey him, but that would have been far better.
Now, since by my own recklessness I have ruined my people,
105 I feel shame before the Trojans and the Trojan women with trailing
robes, that someone who is less of a man than I will say of me:
‘Hektor believed in his own strength and ruined his people.’
Thus they will speak; and as for me, it would be much better
at that time, to go against Achilleus, and slay him, and come back,
110 or else be killed by him in glory in front of the city.
Or if again I set down my shield massive in the middle
and my ponderous helm, and lean my spear up against the rampart
and go out as I am to meet Achilleus the blameless
and promise to give back Helen, and with her all her possessions,
115 all those things that once in the hollow ships Alexandros
brought back to Troy, and these were the beginning of the quarrel;
to give these to Atreus’ sons to take away, and for the Achaians
also to divide up all that is hidden within the city,
and take an oath thereafter for the Trojans in conclave
120 not to hide anything away, but distribute all of it,
as much as the lovely citadel keeps guarded within it;
yet still, why does the heart within me debate on these things?
I might go up to him, and he take no pity upon me
nor respect my position, but kill me naked so, as if I were
125 a woman, once I stripped my armor from me. There is no
way anymore from a tree or a rock to talk to him gently
whispering like a young man and a young girl, in the way
a young man and a young maiden whisper together.
Better to bring on the fight with him as soon as it may be.
130 We shall see to which one the Olympian grants the glory.”

So he pondered, waiting, but Achilleus was closing upon him
in the likeness of the lord of battles, the helm-shining warrior,
and shaking from above his shoulder the dangerous Pelian
ash spear, while the bronze that closed about him was shining
135 like the flare of blazing fire or the sun in its rising.
And the shivers took hold of Hektor when he saw him, and he could no
longer
stand his ground there, but left the gates behind, and fled, frightened,
and Peleus’ son went after him in the confidence of his quick feet.
As when a hawk in the mountains who moves lightest of things flying
140 makes his effortless swoop for a trembling dove, but she slips away
from beneath and flies and he shrill screaming close after her
plunges for her again and again, heart furious to take her;
so Achilleus went straight for him in fury, but Hektor
fled away under the Trojan wall and moved his knees rapidly.
145 They raced along by the watching point and the windy fig tree
always away from under the wall and along the wagon-way
and came to the two sweet-running well springs. There, there are
double
springs of water that jet up, the springs of whirling Skamandros.
One of these runs hot water and the steam on all sides
150 of it rises as if from a fire that was burning inside it.
But the other in the summer-time runs water that is like hail
or chill snow or ice that forms from water. Beside these
in this place, and close to them, are the washing-hollows
of stone, and magnificent, where the wives of the Trojans and their
lovely
155 daughters washed the clothes to shining, in the old days
when there was peace, before the coming of the sons of the Achaians.
They ran beside these, one escaping, the other after him.
It was a great man who fled, but far better he who pursued him
rapidly, since here was no festal beast, no ox-hide
160 they strove for, for these are prizes that are given men for their
running.
No, they ran for the life of Hektor, breaker of horses.
As when about the turnposts racing single-foot horses

run at full speed, when a great prize is laid up for their winning,
a tripod or a woman, in games for a man’s funeral,
165 so these two swept whirling about the city of Priam
in the speed of their feet, while all the gods were looking upon them.
First to speak among them was the father of gods and mortals:
“Ah me, this is a man beloved whom now my eyes watch
being chased around the wall; my heart is mourning for Hektor
170 who has burned in my honor many thigh pieces of oxen
on the peaks of Ida with all her folds, or again on the uttermost
part of the citadel, but now the brilliant Achilleus
drives him in speed of his feet around the city of Priam.
Come then, you immortals, take thought and take counsel, whether
175 to rescue this man or whether to make him, for all his valor,
go down under the hands of Achilleus, the son of Peleus.”
Then in answer the goddess gray-eyed Athene spoke to him:
“Father of the shining bolt, dark misted, what is this you said?
Do you wish to bring back a man who is mortal, one long since
180 doomed by his destiny, from ill-sounding death and release him?
Do it, then; but not all the rest of us gods shall approve you.”
Then Zeus the gatherer of the clouds spoke to her in answer:
“Tritogeneia, dear daughter, do not lose heart; for I say this
not in outright anger, and my meaning toward you is kindly.
185 Act as your purpose would have you do, and hold back no longer.”
So he spoke, and stirred on Athene, who was eager before this,
and she went in a flash of speed down the pinnacles of Olympos.
But swift Achilleus kept unremittingly after Hektor,
chasing him, as a dog in the mountains who has flushed from his covert
190 a deer’s fawn follows him through the folding ways and the valleys,
and though the fawn crouched down under a bush and be hidden
he keeps running and noses him out until he comes on him;
so Hektor could not lose himself from swift-footed Peleion.
If ever he made a dash right on for the gates of Dardanos
195 to get quickly under the strong-built bastions, endeavoring
that they from above with missiles thrown might somehow defend him,
each time Achilleus would get in front and force him to turn back

into the plain, and himself kept his flying course next the city.
As in a dream a man is not able to follow one who runs
200 from him, nor can the runner escape, nor the other pursue him,
so he could not run him down in his speed, nor the other get clear.
How then could Hektor have escaped the death spirits, had not
Apollo, for this last and uttermost time, stood by him
close, and driven strength into him, and made his knees light?
205 But brilliant Achilleus kept shaking his head at his own people
and would not let them throw their bitter projectiles at Hektor
for fear the thrower might win the glory, and himself come second.
But when for the fourth time they had come around to the well springs
then the Father balanced his golden scales, and in them
210 he set two fateful portions of death, which lays men prostrate,
one for Achilleus, and one for Hektor, breaker of horses,
and balanced it by the middle; and Hektor’s death-day was heavier
and dragged downward toward death, and Phoibos Apollo forsook him.
But the goddess gray-eyed Athene came now to Peleion
215 and stood close beside him and addressed him in winged words:
“Beloved
of Zeus, shining Achilleus, I am hopeful now that you and I
will take back great glory to the ships of the Achaians, after
we have killed Hektor, for all his slakeless fury for battle.
Now there is no way for him to get clear away from us,
220 not though Apollo who strikes from afar should be willing to undergo
much, and wallow before our father Zeus of the aegis.
Stand you here then and get your wind again, while I go
to this man and persuade him to stand up to you in combat.”
So spoke Athene, and he was glad at heart, and obeyed her,
225 and stopped, and stood leaning on his bronze-barbed ash spear.
Meanwhile
Athene left him there, and caught up with brilliant Hektor,
and likened herself in form and weariless voice to Deïphobos.
She came now and stood close to him and addressed him in winged
words:
“Dear brother, indeed swift-footed Achilleus is using you roughly

230 and chasing you on swift feet around the city of Priam.
Come on, then; let us stand fast against him and beat him back from
us.”
Then tall Hektor of the shining helm answered her: “Deïphobos,
before now you were dearest to me by far of my brothers,
of all those who were sons of Priam and Hekabē, and now
235 I am minded all the more within my heart to honor you,
you who dared for my sake, when your eyes saw me, to come forth
from the fortifications, while the others stand fast inside them.”
Then in turn the goddess gray-eyed Athene answered him:
“My brother, it is true our father and the lady our mother, taking
240 my knees in turn, and my companions about me, entreated
that I stay within, such was the terror upon all of them.
But the heart within me was worn away by hard sorrow for you.
But now let us go straight on and fight hard, let there be no sparing
of our spears, so that we can find out whether Achilleus
245 will kill us both and carry our bloody war spoils back
to the hollow ships, or will himself go down under your spear.”
So Athene spoke and led him on by beguilement.
Now as the two in their advance were come close together,
first of the two to speak was tall helm-glittering Hektor:
250 “Son of Peleus, I will no longer run from you, as before this
I fled three times around the great city of Priam, and dared not
stand to your onfall. But now my spirit in turn has driven me
to stand and face you. I must take you now, or I must be taken.
Come then, shall we swear before the gods? For these are the highest
255 who shall be witnesses and watch over our agreements.
Brutal as you are I will not defile you, if Zeus grants
to me that I can wear you out, and take the life from you.
But after I have stripped your glorious armor, Achilleus,
I will give your corpse back to the Achaians. Do you do likewise.”

260

Then looking darkly at him swift-footed Achilleus answered:
“Hektor, argue me no agreements. I cannot forgive you.

As there are no trustworthy oaths between men and lions,
nor wolves and lambs have spirit that can be brought to agreement
but forever these hold feelings of hate for each other,
265 so there can be no love between you and me, nor shall there be
oaths between us, but one or the other must fall before then
to glut with his blood Ares the god who fights under the shield’s guard.
Remember every valor of yours, for now the need comes
hardest upon you to be a spearman and a bold warrior.
270 There shall be no more escape for you, but Pallas Athene
will kill you soon by my spear. You will pay in a lump for all those
sorrows of my companions you killed in your spear’s fury.”
So he spoke, and balanced the spear far shadowed, and threw it;
but glorious Hektor kept his eyes on him, and avoided it,
275 for he dropped, watchful, to his knee, and the bronze spear flew over
his shoulder
and stuck in the ground, but Pallas Athene snatched it, and gave it
back to Achilleus, unseen by Hektor shepherd of the people.
But now Hektor spoke out to the blameless son of Peleus:
“You missed; and it was not, O Achilleus like the immortals,
280 from Zeus that you knew my destiny; but you thought so; or rather
you are someone clever in speech and spoke to swindle me,
to make me afraid of you and forget my valor and war strength.
You will not stick your spear in my back as I run away from you
but drive it into my chest as I storm straight in against you;
285 if the god gives you that; and now look out for my brazen
spear. I wish it might be taken full length in your body.
And indeed the war would be a lighter thing for the Trojans
if you were dead, seeing that you are their greatest affliction.”
So he spoke, and balanced the spear far shadowed, and threw it,
290 and struck the middle of Peleïdes’ shield, nor missed it,
but the spear was driven far back from the shield, and Hektor was
angered
because his swift weapon had been loosed from his hand in a vain cast.
He stood discouraged, and had no other ash spear; but lifting
his voice he called aloud on Deïphobos of the pale shield,
295 and asked him for a long spear, but Deïphobos was not near him.

And Hektor knew the truth inside his heart, and spoke aloud:
“No use. Here at last the gods have summoned me deathward.
I thought Deïphobos the hero was here close beside me,
but he is behind the wall and it was Athene cheating me,
300 and now evil death is close to me, and no longer far away,
and there is no way out. So it must long since have been pleasing
to Zeus, and Zeus’ son who strikes from afar, this way; though before
this
they defended me gladly. But now my death is upon me.
Let me at least not die without a struggle, inglorious,
305 but do some big thing first, that men to come shall know of it.”
So he spoke, and pulling out the sharp sword that was slung
at the hollow of his side, huge and heavy, and gathering
himself together, he made his swoop, like a high-flown eagle
who launches himself out of the murk of the clouds on the flat land
310 to catch away a tender lamb or a shivering hare; so
Hektor made his swoop, swinging his sharp sword, and Achilleus
charged, the heart within him loaded with savage fury.
In front of his chest the beautiful elaborate great shield
covered him, and with the glittering helm with four horns
315 he nodded; the lovely golden fringes were shaken about it
which Hephaistos had driven close along the horn of the helmet.
And as a star moves among stars in the night’s darkening,
Hesper, who is the fairest star who stands in the sky, such
was the shining from the pointed spear Achilleus was shaking
320 in his right hand with evil intention toward brilliant Hektor.
He was eyeing Hektor’s splendid body, to see where it might best
give way, but all the rest of the skin was held in the armor,
brazen and splendid, he stripped when he cut down the strength of
Patroklos;
yet showed where the collar-bones hold the neck from the shoulders,
325 the throat, where death of the soul comes most swiftly; in this place
brilliant Achilleus drove the spear as he came on in fury,
and clean through the soft part of the neck the spearpoint was driven.
Yet the ash spear heavy with bronze did not sever the windpipe,
so that Hektor could still make exchange of words spoken.

330 But he dropped in the dust, and brilliant Achilleus vaunted above him:
“Hektor, surely you thought as you killed Patroklos you would be
safe, and since I was far away you thought nothing of me,
O fool, for an avenger was left, far greater than he was,
behind him and away by the hollow ships. And it was I;
335 and I have broken your strength; on you the dogs and the vultures
shall feed and foully rip you; the Achaians will bury Patroklos.”
In his weakness Hektor of the shining helm spoke to him:
“I entreat you, by your life, by your knees, by your parents,
do not let the dogs feed on me by the ships of the Achaians,
340 but take yourself the bronze and gold that are there in abundance,
those gifts that my father and the lady my mother will give you,
and give my body to be taken home again, so that the Trojans
and the wives of the Trojans may give me in death my rite of burning.”
But looking darkly at him swift-footed Achilleus answered:
340 “No more entreating of me, you dog, by knees or parents.
I wish only that my spirit and fury would drive me
to hack your meat away and eat it raw for the things that
you have done to me. So there is no one who can hold the dogs off
from your head, not if they bring here and set before me ten times
350 and twenty times the ransom, and promise more in addition,
not if Priam son of Dardanos should offer to weigh out
your bulk in gold; not even so shall the lady your mother
who herself bore you lay you on the death-bed and mourn you:
no, but the dogs and the birds will have you all for their feasting.”
355 Then, dying, Hektor of the shining helmet spoke to him:
“I know you well as I look upon you; I know that I could not
persuade you, since indeed in your breast is a heart of iron.
Be careful now; for I might be made into the gods’ curse
upon you, on that day when Paris and Phoibos Apollo
360 destroy you in the Skaian gates, for all your valor.”

He spoke, and as he spoke the end of death closed in upon him,
and the soul fluttering free of the limbs went down into Death’s house

mourning her destiny, leaving youth and manhood behind her.
Now though he was a dead man brilliant Achilleus spoke to him:
365 “Die: and I will take my own death at whatever time
Zeus and the rest of the immortals choose to accomplish it.”
He spoke, and pulled the brazen spear from the body, and laid it
on one side, and stripped away from the shoulders the bloody
armor. And the other sons of the Achaians came running about him,
370 and gazed upon the stature and on the imposing beauty
of Hektor; and none stood beside him who did not stab him;
and thus they would speak one to another, each looking at his neighbor:
“See now, Hektor is much softer to handle than he was
when he set the ships ablaze with the burning firebrand.”
375 So as they stood beside him they would speak, and stab him.
But now, when he had despoiled the body, swift-footed brilliant
Achilleus stood among the Achaians and addressed them in winged
words:
“Friends, who are leaders of the Argives and keep their counsel:
since the gods have granted me the killing of this man
380 who has done us much damage, such as not all the others together
have done, come, let us go in armor about the city
to see if we can find out what purpose is in the Trojans,
whether they will abandon their high city, now that this man
has fallen, or are minded to stay, though Hektor lives no longer.
385 Yet still, why does the heart within me debate on these things?
There is a dead man who lies by the ships, unwept, unburied:
Patroklos: and I will not forget him, never so long as
I remain among the living and my knees have their spring beneath me.
And though the dead forget the dead in the house of Hades,
390 even there I shall still remember my beloved companion.
But now, you young men of the Achaians, let us go back, singing
a victory song, to our hollow ships; and take this with us.
We have won ourselves enormous fame; we have killed the great
Hektor
whom the Trojans glorified as if he were a god in their city.”
395 He spoke, and now thought of shameful treatment for glorious
Hektor.

In both of his feet at the back he made holes by the tendons
in the space between ankle and heel, and drew thongs of ox-hide
through them,
and fastened them to the chariot so as to let the head drag,
and mounted the chariot, and lifted the glorious armor inside it,
400 then whipped the horses to a run, and they winged their way
unreluctant.
A cloud of dust rose where Hektor was dragged, his dark hair was
falling
about him, and all that head that was once so handsome was tumbled
in the dust; since by this time Zeus had given him over
to his enemies, to be defiled in the land of his fathers.
405 So all his head was dragged in the dust; and now his mother
tore out her hair, and threw the shining veil far from her
and raised a great wail as she looked upon her son; and his father
beloved groaned pitifully, and all his people about him
were taken with wailing and lamentation all through the city.
410 It was most like what would have happened, if all lowering
Ilion had been burning top to bottom in fire.
His people could scarcely keep the old man in his impatience
from storming out of the Dardanian gates; he implored them
all, and wallowed in the muck before them calling on each man
415 and naming him by his name: “Give way, dear friends,
and let me alone though you care for me, leave me to go out
from the city and make my way to the ships of the Achaians.
I must be suppliant to this man, who is harsh and violent,
and he might have respect for my age and take pity upon it
420 since I am old, and his father also is old, as I am,
Peleus, who begot and reared him to be an affliction
on the Trojans. He has given us most sorrow, beyond all others,
such is the number of my flowering sons he has cut down.
But for all of these I mourn not so much, in spite of my sorrow,
425 as for one, Hektor, and the sharp grief for him will carry me downward
into Death’s house. I wish he had died in my arms, for that way
we two, I myself and his mother who bore him unhappy,
might so have glutted ourselves with weeping for him and mourning.”

So he spoke, in tears, and beside him mourned the citizens.
430 But for the women of Troy Hekabē led out the thronging
chant of sorrow: “Child, I am wretched. What shall my life be
in my sorrows, now you are dead, who by day and in the night
were my glory in the town, and to all of the Trojans
and the women of Troy a blessing throughout their city. They adored
you
435 as if you were a god, since in truth you were their high honor
while you lived. Now death and fate have closed in upon you.”
So she spoke in tears but the wife of Hektor had not yet
heard: for no sure messenger had come to her and told her
how her husband had held his ground there outside the gates;
440 but she was weaving a web in the inner room of the high house,
a red folding robe, and inworking elaborate figures.
She called out through the house to her lovely-haired handmaidens
to set a great cauldron over the fire, so that there would be
hot water for Hektor’s bath as he came back out of the fighting;
445 poor innocent, nor knew how, far from waters for bathing,
Pallas Athene had cut him down at the hands of Achilleus.
She heard from the great bastion the noise of mourning and sorrow.
Her limbs spun, and the shuttle dropped from her hand to the ground.
Then
she called aloud to her lovely-haired handmaidens: “Come here.
450 Two of you come with me, so I can see what has happened.
I heard the voice of Hektor’s honored mother; within me
my own heart rising beats in my mouth, my limbs under me
are frozen. Surely some evil is near for the children of Priam.
May what I say come never close to my ear; yet dreadfully
455 I fear that great Achilleus might have cut off bold Hektor
alone, away from the city, and be driving him into the flat land,
might put an end to that bitter pride of courage, that always
was on him, since he would never stay back where the men were in
numbers
but break far out in front, and give way in his fury to no man.”
460 So she spoke, and ran out of the house like a raving woman

with pulsing heart, and her two handmaidens went along with her.
But when she came to the bastion and where the men were gathered
she stopped, staring, on the wall; and she saw him
being dragged in front of the city, and the running horses
465 dragged him at random toward the hollow ships of the Achaians.
The darkness of night misted over the eyes of Andromachē.
She fell backward, and gasped the life breath from her, and far off
threw from her head the shining gear that ordered her headdress,
the diadem and the cap, and the holding-band woven together,
470 and the circlet, which Aphrodite the golden once had given her
on that day when Hektor of the shining helmet led her forth
from the house of Eëtion, and gave numberless gifts to win her.
And about her stood thronging her husband’s sisters and the wives of
his brothers
and these, in her despair for death, held her up among them.
475 But she, when she breathed again and the life was gathered back into
her,
lifted her voice among the women of Troy in mourning:
“Hektor, I grieve for you. You and I were born to a single
destiny, you in Troy in the house of Priam, and I
in Thebe, underneath the timbered mountain of Plakos
480 in the house of Eëtion, who cared for me when I was little,
ill-fated he, I ill-starred. I wish he had never begotten me.
Now you go down to the house of Death in the secret places
of the earth, and left me here behind in the sorrow of mourning,
a widow in your house, and the boy is only a baby
485 who was born to you and me, the unfortunate. You cannot help him,
Hektor, anymore, since you are dead. Nor can he help you.
Though he escape the attack of the Achaians with all its sorrows,
yet all his days for your sake there will be hard work for him
and sorrows, for others will take his lands away from him. The day
490 of bereavement leaves a child with no agemates to befriend him.
He bows his head before every man, his cheeks are bewept, he
goes, needy, a boy among his father’s companions,
and tugs at this man by the mantle, that man by the tunic,
and they pity him, and one gives him a tiny drink from a goblet,

495 enough to moisten his lips, not enough to moisten his palate.
But one whose parents are living beats him out of the banquet
hitting him with his fists and in words also abuses him:
‘Get out, you! Your father is not dining among us.’
And the boy goes away in tears to his widowed mother,
500 Astyanax, who in days before on the knees of his father
would eat only the marrow or the flesh of sheep that was fattest.
And when sleep would come upon him and he was done with his
playing,
he would go to sleep in a bed, in the arms of his nurse, in a soft
bed, with his heart given all its fill of luxury.
505 Now, with his dear father gone, he has much to suffer:
he, whom the Trojans have called Astyanax, lord of the city,
since it was you alone who defended the gates and the long walls.
But now, beside the curving ships, far away from your parents,
the writhing worms will feed, when the dogs have had enough of you,
510 on your naked corpse, though in your house there is clothing laid up
that is fine-textured and pleasant, wrought by the hands of women.
But all of these I will burn up in the fire’s blazing,
no use to you, since you will never be laid away in them;
but in your honor, from the men of Troy and the Trojan women.”
515 So she spoke, in tears; and the women joined in her mourning.

BOOK TWENTY-THREE

So they were mourning through the city. Meanwhile, the Achaians,
after they had made their way back to their ships and the Hellespont,
scattered, the rest of them, each man to his own ship. Except
Achilleus would not allow the Myrmidons to be scattered,
5 but called out to his companions whose delight was in battle:
“Myrmidons, you of the fast horses, my steadfast companions,
we must not yet slip free of the chariots our single-foot horses,
but with these very horses and chariots we must drive close up
to Patroklos and mourn him, since such is the privilege of the perished.
10 Then, when we have taken full satisfaction from the sorrowful
dirge, we shall set our horses free, and all of us eat here.”
He spoke, and all of them assembled moaned, and Achilleus led
them.
Three times, mourning, they drove their horses with flowing manes
about
the body, and among them Thetis stirred the passion for weeping.
15 The sands were wet, and the armor of men was wet with their tears.
Such
was their longing after Patroklos, who drove men to thoughts of terror.
Peleus’ son led the thronging chant of their lamentation,
and laid his manslaughtering hands over the chest of his dear friend:
“Good-bye, Patroklos. I hail you even in the house of the death god.
20 All that I promised you in time past I am accomplishing,
that I would drag Hektor here and give him to the dogs to feed on
raw, and before your burning pyre to behead twelve glorious
children of the Trojans for my anger over your slaying.”
He spoke, and thought of shameful treatment for glorious Hektor.
25 He laid him on his face in the dust by the bier of Menoitios’

son. Meanwhile the others took off each man his glittering
brazen armor, and all unyoked their proud neighing horses
and sat down in their thousands beside the ship of swift-footed
Aiakides, who set the funeral feast in abundance
30 before them; and many shining oxen were slaughtered with the stroke
of the iron, and many sheep and bleating goats and numerous
swine with shining teeth and the fat abundant upon them
were singed and stretched out across the flame of Hephaistos.
The blood ran and was caught in cups all around the dead man.

35

40

45

50

55

But now the kings of the Achaians brought the swift-footed
lord, the son of Peleus, to great Agamemnon, hardly
persuading him, since his heart was still angered for his companion.
When these had made their way to the shelter of Agamemnon
straightway they gave orders to the heralds, the clear crying,
to set a great cauldron over the fire, if so they might persuade
the son of Peleus to wash away the filth of the bloodstains,
but he denied them stubbornly and swore an oath on it:
“No, before Zeus, who is greatest of gods and the highest,
there is no right in letting water come near my head, until
I have laid Patroklos on the burning pyre, and heaped the mound over
him,
and cut my hair for him, since there will come no second sorrow
like this to my heart again while I am still one of the living.
Then let us now give way to the gloomy feast; and with the dawn
cause your people to rise, O lord of men Agamemnon,
and bring in timber and lay it by, with all that is fitting
for the dead man to have when he goes down under the gloom and the
darkness,
so that with the more speed the unwearying fire may burn him
away from our eyes, and the people turn back to that which they must
do.”
So he spoke, and they listened well to him and obeyed him,
and in speed and haste they got the dinner ready, and each man

feasted, nor was any man’s hunger denied a fair portion.
But when they had put aside their desire for eating and drinking,
they went away to sleep, each man into his own shelter,
but along the beach of the thunderous sea the son of Peleus
60 lay down, groaning heavily, among the Myrmidon numbers
in a clear place where the waves washed over the beach; and at that
time
sleep caught him and was drifted sweetly about him, washing
the sorrows out of his mind, for his shining limbs were grown weary
indeed, from running in chase of Hektor toward windy Ilion;
65 and there appeared to him the ghost of unhappy Patroklos
all in his likeness for stature, and the lovely eyes, and voice,
and wore such clothing as Patroklos had worn on his body.
The ghost came and stood over his head and spoke a word to him:
“You sleep, Achilleus; you have forgotten me; but you were not
70 careless of me when I lived, but only in death. Bury me
as quickly as may be, let me pass through the gates of Hades.
The souls, the images of dead men, hold me at a distance,
and will not let me cross the river and mingle among them,
but I wander as I am by Hades’ house of the wide gates.
75 And I call upon you in sorrow, give me your hand; no longer
shall I come back from death, once you give me my rite of burning.
No longer shall you and I, alive, sit apart from our other
beloved companions and make our plans, since the bitter destiny
that was given me when I was born has opened its jaws to take me.
80 And you, Achilleus like the gods, have your own destiny;
to be killed under the wall of the prospering Trojans. There is one
more thing I will say, and ask of you, if you will obey me:
do not have my bones laid apart from yours, Achilleus,
but with them, just as we grew up together in your house,
85 when Menoitios brought me there from Opous, when I was little,
and into your house, by reason of a baneful manslaying,
on that day when I killed the son of Amphidamas. I was
a child only, nor intended it, but was angered over a dice game.
There the rider Peleus took me into his own house,
90 and brought me carefully up, and named me to be your henchman.

Therefore, let one single vessel, the golden two-handled
urn the lady your mother gave you, hold both our ashes.”
Then in answer to him spoke swift-footed Achilleus:
“How is it, O hallowed head of my brother, you have come back to me
95 here, and tell me all these several things? Yet surely
I am accomplishing all, and I shall do as you tell me.
But stand closer to me, and let us, if only for a little,
embrace, and take full satisfaction from the dirge of sorrow.”
So he spoke, and with his own arms reached for him, but could not
100 take him, but the spirit went underground, like vapor,
with a thin cry, and Achilleus started awake, staring,
and drove his hands together, and spoke, and his words were sorrowful:
“Oh, wonder! Even in the house of Hades there is left something,
a soul and an image, but there is no real heart of life in it.
105 For all night long the phantom of unhappy Patroklos
stood over me in lamentation and mourning, and the likeness
to him was wonderful, and it told me each thing I should do.”
So he spoke, and stirred in all of them the passion of mourning,
and Dawn of the rose fingers showed on them as still they mourned
110 about the forlorn body. Now powerful Agamemnon
gave order for men and mules to assemble from all the shelters
and bring in timber, and a great man led them in motion,
Meriones, the henchman of courtly Idomeneus. These then
went out and in their hands carried axes to cut wood
115 and ropes firmly woven, and their mules went on ahead of them.
They went many ways, uphill, downhill, sidehill and slantwise;
but when they came to the spurs of Ida with all her well springs,
they set to hewing with the thin edge of bronze and leaning
their weight to the strokes on towering-leafed oak trees that toppled
120 with huge crashing; then the Achaians splitting the timbers
fastened them to the mules and these with their feet tore up
the ground as they pulled through the dense undergrowth to the flat
land.
All the woodcutters carried logs themselves; such was the order
of Meriones, the henchman of courtly Idomeneus. These then
125 threw down their burdens in order along the beach, where Achilleus

had chosen place for a huge grave mound, for himself and Patroklos.
Then when on all sides they had thrown down abundance of timber,
they sat down where they were, assembled. And now Achilleus
gave order at once to the Myrmidons, whose delight was in battle,
130 to belt themselves in bronze and each man to yoke his horses
to the chariot. And they rose up and got into their armor
and stepped up, charioteer and sideman, into the chariots
with the horsemen in front, and behind them came on a cloud of footsoldiers
by thousands; and in the midst his companions carried Patroklos.
135 They covered all the corpse under the locks of their hair, which they
cut off
and dropped on him, and behind them brilliant Achilleus held the head
sorrowing, for this was his true friend he escorted toward Hades.
When these had come to the place Achilleus had spoken of to them
they laid him down, and quickly piled up abundant timber.
140 And now brilliant swift-footed Achilleus remembered one more thing.
He stood apart from the pyre and cut off a lock of fair hair
which he had grown long to give to the river Spercheios, and gazing
in deep distress out over the wine-blue water, he spoke forth:
“Spercheios, it was in vain that Peleus my father vowed to you
145 that there, when I had won home to the beloved land of my fathers,
I would cut my hair for you and make you a grand and holy
sacrifice of fifty rams consecrate to the waters
of your springs, where is your holy ground and your smoking altar.
So the old man vowed, but you did not accomplish his purpose.
150 Now, since I do not return to the beloved land of my fathers,
I would give my hair into the keeping of the hero Patroklos.”
He spoke, and laid his hair in the hands of his beloved
companion, and stirred in all of them the passion of mourning.
And now the light of the sun would have set on their lamentation
155 had not Achilleus soon stood by Agamemnon and spoken:
“Son of Atreus, beyond others the people of the Achaians
will obey your words. There can be enough, even in mourning.
Now cause them to scatter from the fire and bid them make ready

their dinner; and we, who are most nearly concerned with the dead
man,
160 shall do this work; except only let the leaders stay near us.”
Then the lord of men, Agamemnon, when he had heard this,
at once caused the people to disperse among the balanced ships,
but the close mourners stayed by the place and piled up the timber,
and built a pyre a hundred feet long this way and that way,
165 and on the peak of the pyre they laid the body, sorrowful
at heart; and in front of it skinned and set in order numbers
of fat sheep and shambling horn-curved cattle; and from all
great-hearted Achilleus took the fat and wrapped the corpse in it
from head to foot, and piled up the skinned bodies about it.
170 Then he set beside him two-handled jars of oil and honey
leaning them against the bier, and drove four horses with strong necks
swiftly aloft the pyre with loud lamentation. And there were
nine dogs of the table that had belonged to the lord Patroklos.
Of these he cut the throats of two, and set them on the pyre;
175 and so also killed twelve noble sons of the great-hearted Trojans
with the stroke of bronze, and evil were the thoughts in his heart
against them,
and let loose the iron fury of the fire to feed on them.
Then he groaned, and called by name on his beloved companion:
“Good-bye, Patroklos. I hail you even in the house of the death god
180 for all that I promised you in time past I am accomplishing.
Here are twelve noble sons of the great-hearted Trojans
whom the fire feeds on, all, as it feeds on you. But I will not
give Hektor, Priam’s son, to the fire, but the dogs, to feast on.”
So he spoke his threat. But the dogs did not deal with Hektor,
185 for Aphrodite, daughter of Zeus, drove the dogs back from him
by day and night, and anointed him with rosy immortal
oil, so Achilleus, when he dragged him about, might not tear him.
And Phoibos Apollo brought down a darkening mist about him
from the sky to the plain, and covered with it all the space that was
taken
190 by the dead man, to keep the force of the sun from coming

first, and wither his body away by limbs and sinews.
But the pyre of dead Patroklos would not light. Then swift-footed
brilliant Achilleus thought of one more thing that he must do.
He stood apart from the pyre and made his prayer to the two winds
195 Boreas and Zephyros, north wind and west, and promised them
splendid
offerings, and much outpouring from a golden goblet entreated them
to come, so that the bodies might with best speed burn in the fire
and the timber burst into flame. And Iris, hearing his prayer,
went swiftly as messenger to the winds for him. Now the winds
200 assembled within the house of storm-blowing Zephyros
were taking part in a feast, and Iris paused in her running
and stood on the stone doorsill; but they, when their eyes saw her,
sprang to their feet, and each one asked her to sit beside him.
But she refused to be seated and spoke her word to them: “I must not
205 sit down. I am going back to the running waters of Ocean
and the Aithiopians’ land, where they are making grand sacrifice
to the immortals; there I, too, shall partake of the sacraments.
But Achilleus’ prayer is that Boreas and blustering Zephyros
may come to him, and he promises them splendid offerings,
210 so that you may set ablaze the funeral pyre, whereon lies
Patroklos, with all Achaians mourning about him.”
She spoke so, and went away, and they with immortal
clamor rose up, and swept the clouds in confusion before them.
They came with a sudden blast upon the sea, and the waves rose
215 under the whistling wind. They came to the generous Troad
and hit the pyre, and a huge inhuman blaze rose, roaring.
Nightlong they piled the flames on the funeral pyre together
and blew with a screaming blast, and nightlong swift-footed Achilleus
from a golden mixing bowl, with a two-handled goblet in his hand,
220 drew the wine and poured it on the ground and drenched the ground
with it,
and called upon the soul of unhappy Patroklos. And as
a father mourns as he burns the bones of a son, who was married
only now, and died to grieve his unhappy parents,
so Achilleus was mourning as he burned his companion’s

225 bones, and dragged himself by the fire in close lamentation.
At that time when the dawn star passes across earth, harbinger
of light, and after him dawn of the saffron mantle is scattered
across the sea, the fire died down and the flames were over.
The winds took their way back toward home again, crossing
230 the Thracian water, and it boiled with a moaning swell as they crossed
it.
The son of Peleus turned aside and away from the burning
and lay down exhausted, and sweet sleep rose upon him. But now
they who were with the son of Atreus assembled together
and the sound and murmur of their oncoming wakened Achilleus,
235 who straightened himself and sat upright and spoke a word to him:
“Son of Atreus, and you other greatest of all the Achaians,
first put out with gleaming wine the pyre that is burning,
all that still has on it the fury of fire; and afterward
we shall gather up the bones of Patroklos, the son of Menoitios,
240 which we shall easily tell apart, since they are conspicuous
where he lay in the middle of the pyre and the others far from him
at the edge burned, the men indiscriminately with the horses.
And let us lay his bones in a golden jar and a double
fold of fat, until I myself enfold him in Hades.
245 And I would have you build a grave mound which is not very great
but such as will be fitting, for now; afterward, the Achaians
can make it broad and high—such of you Achaians as may be
left to survive me here by the benched ships, after I am gone.”
So he spoke, and they did as swift-footed Peleion told them.
250 First with gleaming wine they put out the pyre that was burning,
as much as was still aflame, and the ashes dropped deep from it.
Then they gathered up the white bones of their gentle companion,
weeping, and put them into a golden jar with a double
fold of fat, and laid it away in his shelter, and covered it
255 with a thin veil; then laid out the tomb and cast down the holding walls
around the funeral pyre, then heaped the loose earth over them
and piled the tomb, and turned to go away. But Achilleus

held the people there, and made them sit down in a wide assembly,
and brought prizes for games out of his ships, cauldrons and tripods,
260 and horses and mules and the powerful high heads of cattle
and fair-girdled women and gray iron. First of all
he set forth the glorious prizes for speed of foot for the horsemen:
a woman faultless in the work of her hands to lead away
and a tripod with ears and holding twenty-two measures
265 for the first prize; and for the second he set forth a six-year-old
unbroken mare who carried a mule foal within her.
Then for the third prize he set forth a splendid unfired
cauldron, which held four measures, with its natural gloss still upon it.
For the fourth place he set out two talents’ weight of gold, and for
270 the fifth place set forth an unfired jar with two handles.
He stood upright and spoke his word out among the Argives:
“Son of Atreus and all you other strong-greaved Achaians,
these prizes are in the place of games and wait for the horsemen.
Now if we Achaians were contending for the sake of some other
275 hero, I myself should take the first prize away to my shelter.
You know how much my horses surpass in their speed all others;
yes, for they are immortal horses, and Poseidon gave them
to Peleus my father, who in turn gave them into my hands.
But I stay here at the side, and my single-foot horses stay with me;
280 such is the high glory of the charioteer they have lost,
the gentle one, who so many times anointed their manes with
soft olive oil, after he had washed them in shining water.
Therefore these two horses stand here and grieve, and their manes
are swept along the ground as they stand with hearts full of sorrow.
285 But take, the rest of you, places in the field, whichever Achaian
has confidence in his horses and his compacted chariot.”
So spoke the son of Peleus, and the swift riders gathered.
Far the first to rise up was the lord of men Eumelos,
own son of Admetos, who surpassed in horsemanship. After
290 him rose up the son of Tydeus, strong Diomedes,
and led under the yoke the Trojan horses whom he had taken
by force from Aineias, but Aineias himself was saved by Apollo.

After him rose the son of Atreus, fair-haired Menelaos
the sky-descended, and led beneath the yoke the swift horses,
295 Aithe, Agamemnon’s mare, and his own Podargos.
Echepolos, son of Anchises, gave her to Agamemnon
as a gift, so as not to have to go with him to windy Ilion
but stay where he was and enjoy himself, since Zeus had given him
great wealth, and he made his home in the wide spaces of Sikyon.
300 This mare, who was straining hard for the race, Menelaos harnessed.
Fourth to order his horses with flowing manes was Antilochos,
the glorious son of Nestor, Neleus’ son, the high-hearted
lord, and fast-running horses out of the breed of Pylos
pulled his chariot, and his father standing close beside him
305 gave well-intentioned advice to his own good understanding:
“Antilochos, you are young indeed, but Zeus and Poseidon
have loved you and taught you horsemanship in all of its aspects.
Therefore there is no great need to instruct you; you yourself
know well how to double the turning-post. Yet in this race your horse
310 should run slowest. Therefore I think your work will be heavy.
The horses of these men are faster, but they themselves do not
understand anymore than you of the science of racing.
Remember then, dear son, to have your mind full of every
resource of skill, so that the prizes may not elude you.
315 The woodcutter is far better for skill than he is for brute strength.
It is by skill that the sea captain holds his rapid ship
on its course, though torn by winds, over the wine-blue water.
By skill charioteer outpasses charioteer. He
who has put all his confidence in his horses and chariot
320 and recklessly makes a turn that is loose one way or another
finds his horses drifting out of the course and does not control them.
But the man, though he drive the slower horses, who takes his
advantage,
keeps his eye always on the post and turns tight, ever watchful,
pulled with the ox-hide reins on the course, as in the beginning,
325 and holds his horses steady in hand, and watches the leader.
I will give you a clear mark and you cannot fail to notice it.
There is a dry stump standing up from the ground about six feet,

oak, it may be, or pine, and not rotted away by rain-water,
and two white stones are leaned against it, one on either side,
330 at the joining place of the ways, and there is smooth driving around it.
Either it is the grave-mark of someone who died long ago,
or was set as a racing goal by men who lived before our time.
Now swift-footed brilliant Achilleus has made it the turning-post.
You must drive your chariot and horses so as to hug this,
335 and yourself, in the strong-fabricated chariot, lean over
a little to the left of the course, and as for your right horse, whip him
and urge him along, slackening your hands to give him his full rein,
but make your left-hand horse keep hard against the turning-post
so that the hub’s edge of your fashioned wheel will seem to be
340 touching it, yet take care not really to brush against it,
for, if so, you might damage your horses and break your chariot,
and that will be a thing of joy for the others, and a failure
for you. So, dear son, drive thoughtfully and be watchful.
For if you follow the others but get first by the turning-post,
345 there is none who could sprint to make it up, nor close you, nor pass
you,
not if the man behind you were driving the great Arion,
the swift horse of Adrestos, whose birth is from the immortals,
or Laomedon’s horses, who were the pride of those raised in this
country.”
So spoke Nestor the son of Neleus, and turned back to his place
350 and sat down, having talked to his son of each stage in the contest.
Fifth to order his horses with flowing manes was Meriones.
They climbed to the chariots and deposited the lots. Achilleus
shook them, and the first to fall out was that of Antilochos,
Nestor’s son, and strong Eumelos drew next after him,
355 and after him the son of Atreus, Menelaos the spear-famed.
Meriones drew the next lane to drive, and the last for the driving
of horses was drawn by far the best of them all, Diomedes.
They stood in line for the start, and Achilleus showed them the turnpost
far away on the level plain, and beside it he stationed
360 a judge, Phoinix the godlike, the follower of his father,

to mark and remember the running and bring back a true story.
Then all held their whips high-lifted above their horses,
then struck with the whip thongs and in words urged their horses
onward
into speed. Rapidly they made their way over the flat land
365 and presently were far away from the ships. The dust lifting
clung beneath the horses’ chests like cloud or a stormwhirl.
Their manes streamed along the blast of the wind, the chariots
rocking now would dip to the earth who fosters so many
and now again would spring up clear of the ground, and the drivers
370 stood in the chariots, with the spirit beating in each man
with the strain to win, and each was calling aloud upon his own
horses, and the horses flew through the dust of the flat land.
But as the rapid horses were running the last of the race-course
back, and toward the gray sea, then the mettle of each began to
375 show itself, and the field of horses strung out, and before long
out in front was the swift-stepping team of the son of Pheres,
Eumelos, and after him the stallions of Diomedes,
the Trojan horses, not far behind at all, but close on him,
for they seemed forever on the point of climbing his chariot
380 and the wind of them was hot on the back and on the broad shoulders
of Eumelos. They lowered their heads and flew close after him.
And now he might have passed him or run to a doubtful decision,
had not Phoibos Apollo been angry with Diomedes,
Tydeus’ son, and dashed the shining whip from his hands, so
385 that the tears began to stream from his eyes, for his anger
as he watched how the mares of Eumelos drew far ahead of him
while his own horses ran without the whip and were slowed. Yet
Athene did not fail to see the foul play of Apollo
on Tydeus’ son. She swept in speed to the shepherd of the people
390 and gave him back his whip, and inspired strength into his horses.
Then in her wrath she went on after the son of Admetos
and she, a goddess, smashed his chariot yoke, and his horses
ran on either side of the way, the pole dragged, and Eumelos
himself was sent spinning out beside the wheel of the chariot

395 so that his elbows were all torn, and his mouth, and his nostrils,
and his forehead was lacerated about the brows, and his eyes
filled with tears, and the springing voice was held fast within him.
Then the son of Tydeus, turning his single-foot horses to pass him,
went far out in front of the others, seeing that Athene
400 had inspired strength in his horses and to himself gave the glory.
After him came the son of Atreus, fair-haired Menelaos.
But Antilochos cried out aloud to his father’s horses:
“Come on, you two. Pull, as fast as you can! I am not
trying to make you match your speed with the speed of those others,
405 the horses of Tydeus’ valiant son, to whom now Athene
has granted speed and to their rider has given the glory.
But make your burst to catch the horses of the son of Atreus
nor let them leave you behind, for fear Aithe who is female
may shower you in mockery. Are you falling back, my brave horses?
410 For I will tell you this, and it will be a thing accomplished.
There will be no more care for you from the shepherd of the people,
Nestor, but he will slaughter you out of hand with the edge
of bronze, if we win the meaner prize because you are unwilling.
Keep on close after him and make all the speed you are able.
415 I myself shall know what to do and contrive it, so that
we get by in the narrow place of the way. He will not escape me.”
So he spoke, and they fearing the angry voice of their master
ran harder for a little while, and presently after this
battle-stubborn Antilochos saw where the hollow way narrowed.
420 There was a break in the ground where winter water had gathered
and broken out of the road, and made a sunken place all about.
Menelaos shrinking from a collision of chariots steered there,
but Antilochos also turned out his single-foot horses
from the road, and bore a little way aside, and went after him;
425 and the son of Atreus was frightened and called out aloud to
Antilochos:
“Antilochos, this is reckless horsemanship. Hold in your horses.
The way is narrow here, it will soon be wider for passing.
Be careful not to crash your chariot and wreck both of us.”
So he spoke, but Antilochos drove on all the harder

430 with a whiplash for greater speed, as if he had never heard him.
As far as is the range of a discus swung from the shoulder
and thrown by a stripling who tries out the strength of his young
manhood,
so far they ran even, but then the mares of Atreides gave way
and fell back, for he of his own will slackened his driving
435 for fear that in the road the single-foot horses might crash
and overturn the strong-fabricated chariots, and the men
themselves go down in the dust through their hard striving for victory.
But Menelaos of the fair hair called to him in anger:
“Antilochos, there is no other man more cursed than you are.
440 Damn you. We Achaians lied when we said you had good sense.
Even so, you will not get this prize without having to take oath.
” He spoke, and lifted his voice and called aloud to his horses:
“Never hold back now, never stop, for all your hearts are
sorrowful. The feet of these and their knees will weary
445 before yours do, seeing that the youth is gone from those horses.”
So he spoke, and they fearing the angry voice of their master
ran the harder, and soon were close up behind the others.
Now the Argives who sat in their assembly were watching
the horses, and the horses flew through the dust of the flat land.
450 Idomeneus, lord of the Kretans, was first to make out the horses,
for he sat apart from the others assembled, and higher up, where
he could see all ways, and from far off he heard Diomedes
calling, and knew him, and made out one horse ahead of the others
who was conspicuous, all red, except on his forehead
455 there was a white mark, round, like the full moon. Idomeneus
rose to his feet upright and spoke his word out to the Argives:
“Friends, who are leaders of the Argives and keep their counsel:
am I the only one who can see the horses, or can you
also? It seems to me there are other horses leading
460 and I make out another charioteer. The mares of Eumelos
must have come to grief somewhere in the plain, who led on the way
out,
for those I saw running out in front as they made the turn-post

I can see no longer anywhere, though I watch and though my eyes
look everywhere about the plain of Troy. But it must be
465 that the reins got away from the charioteer, or he could not hold them
well in hand at the goal and failed to double the turn-post.
There I think he must have been thrown out and his chariot broken,
and the mares bolted away with the wildness upon their spirit.
But you also stand up and look for yourselves; I cannot
470 well make out, but it seems to me the man who is leading
is an Aitolian by birth, but lord of the Argives,
the son of Tydeus, breaker of horses, strong Diomedes.”
Swift Aias, son of Oïleus, spoke shamefully to him in anger:
“Idomeneus, what was all this windy talk? The light-footed
475 horses are still far where they sweep over the great plain.
You are not by so much the youngest among the Argives,
nor do the eyes in your head see so much sharper than others.
But forever you are windy with your words, and you should not
be a windy speaker. There are others here better than you are.
480 The horses who are in front are the same as before, and they are
those of Eumelos, and he stands holding the reins behind them.”
The lord of the Kretans answered him to his face in anger:
“Aias, surpassing in abuse, yet stupid, in all else
you are worst of the Argives with that stubborn mind of yours. Come
then,
485 let us put up a wager of a tripod or cauldron
and make Agamemnon, son of Atreus, witness between us
as to which horses lead. And when you pay, you will find out.”
So he spoke, and swift Aias, son of Oïleus, was rising
up, angry in turn, to trade hard words with him. And now
490 the quarrel between the two of them would have gone still further,
had not Achilleus himself risen up and spoken between them:
“No longer now, Aias and Idomeneus, continue
to exchange this bitter and evil talk. It is not becoming.
If another acted so, you yourselves would be angry.
495 Rather sit down again among those assembled and watch for
the horses, and they in their strain for victory will before long
be here. Then you each can see for himself, and learn which

of the Argives’ horses have run first and which have run second.”
He spoke, and now Tydeus’ son in his rapid course was close on them
500 and he lashed them always with the whipstroke from the shoulder. His
horses
still lifted their feet light and high as they made their swift passage.
Dust flying splashed always the charioteer, and the chariot
that was overlaid with gold and tin still rolled hard after
the flying feet of the horses, and in their wake there was not much
505 trace from the running rims of the wheels left in the thin dust.
The horses came in running hard. Diomedes stopped them
in the middle of where the men were assembled, with the dense sweat
starting
and dripping to the ground from neck and chest of his horses.
He himself vaulted down to the ground from his shining chariot
510 and leaned his whip against the yoke. Nor did strong Sthenelos
delay, but made haste to take up the prizes, and gave the woman
to his high-hearted companions to lead away and the tripod
with ears to carry, while Diomedes set free the horses.
After him Neleian Antilochos drove in his horses,
515 having passed Menelaos, not by speed but by taking advantage.
But even so Menelaos held his fast horses close on him.
As far as from the wheel stands the horse who is straining
to pull his master with the chariot over the flat land;
the extreme hairs in the tail of the horse brush against the running
520 rim of the wheel, and he courses very close, there is not much
space between as he runs a great way over the flat land;
by so much Menelaos was left behind by Antilochos
the blameless. At first he was left behind the length of a discus
thrown, but was overhauling him fast, with Aithe
525 of the fair mane, Agamemnon’s mare, putting on a strong burst.
If both of them had had to run the course any further,
Menelaos would have passed him, and there could have been no
argument.
But Meriones, strong henchman of Idomeneus, was left
a spearcast’s length behind by glorious Menelaos.

530 For his horses with splendid manes were slowest of all, and likewise
he himself was of least account for the racing of chariots.
Last and behind them all came in the son of Admetos
dragging his fine chariot and driving his horses before him,
and seeing this, brilliant swift-footed Achilleus took pity upon him
535 and stood forth among the Argives and spoke to them all in winged
words:
“The best man is driving his single-foot horses in last.
Come then, we must give some kind of prize, and well he deserves it;
second prize; let first place go to the son of Tydeus.”
So he spoke, and all gave approval to what he was urging,
540 and he would have given him the horse, since all the Achaians
approved, had not Antilochos, son of great-hearted Nestor,
stood up to answer Peleid Achilleus, and argue:
“Achilleus, I shall be very angry with you if you accomplish
what you have said. You mean to take my prize away from me,
545 with the thought in mind that his chariot fouled and his running horses
but he himself is great. He should have prayed to the immortal
gods. That is why he came in last of all in the running.
But if you are sorry for him and he is dear to your liking,
there is abundant gold in your shelter, and there is bronze there
550 and animals, and there are handmaidens and single-foot horses.
You can take from these, and give him afterward a prize still greater
than mine, or now at once, and have the Achaians applaud you.
But the mare I will not give up, and the man who wants her
must fight me for her with his hands before he can take her.”
555 So he spoke, but brilliant swift-footed Achilleus, favoring
Antilochos, smiled, since he was his beloved companion,
and answered him and addressed him in winged words: “Antilochos,
if you would have me bring some other thing out of my dwelling
as special gift for Eumelos, then for your sake I will do it.
I will give him that corselet I stripped from Asteropaios;
560 it is bronze, but there is an overlay circled about it
in shining tin. It will be a gift that will mean much to him.”
He spoke, and told Automedon, his beloved companion,

to bring it out of the shelter, and he went away, and brought it back,
565 and put it in Eumelos’ hands. And he accepted it joyfully.
But now Menelaos, heart full of bitterness, stood up among them
in relentless anger against Antilochos, and the herald
put the staff into his hand and gave the call for the Argives
to be silent. And he stood forth, a man like a god, and spoke to them:
570 “Antilochos, you had good sense once. See what you have done.
You have defiled my horsemanship, you have fouled my horses
by throwing your horses in their way, though yours were far slower.
Come then, O leaders of the Argives and their men of counsel:
judge between the two of us now; and without favor;
575 so that no man of the bronze-armored Achaians shall say of us:
‘Menelaos using lies and force against Antilochos
went off with the mare he won, for his horses were far slower
but he himself was greater in power and degree.’ Or rather
come, I myself will give the judgment, and I think no other
580 man of the Danaäns can call it in question, for it will be right.
Antilochos, beloved of Zeus, come here. This is justice.
Stand in front of your horses and chariot, and in your hand take
up the narrow whip with which you drove them before, then
lay your hand on the horses and swear by him who encircles
585 the earth and shakes it you used no guile to baffle my chariot.”
Then in turn Antilochos of the good counsel answered him:
“Enough now. For I, my lord Menelaos, am younger
by far than you, and you are the greater and go before me.
You know how greedy transgressions flower in a young man, seeing
590 that his mind is the more active but his judgment is lightweight.
Therefore
I would have your heart be patient with me. I myself will give you
the mare I won, and if there were something still greater you asked for
out of my house, I should still be willing at once to give it
to you, beloved of Zeus, rather than all my days
595 fall from your favor and be in the wrong before the divinities.”
He spoke, the son of Nestor the great-hearted, and leading
the mare up gave her to Menelaos’ hands. But his anger

was softened, as with dew the ears of corn are softened
in the standing corn growth of a shuddering field. For you also
600 the heart, O Menelaos, was thus softened within you.
He spoke to him aloud and addressed him in winged words:
“Antilochos,
I myself, who was angry, now will give way before you,
since you were not formerly loose-minded or vain. It is only
that this time your youth got the better of your intelligence.
605 Beware another time of playing tricks on your betters.
Any other man of the Achaians might not have appeased me.
But you have suffered much for me, and done much hard work,
and your noble father, too, and your brother for my sake. Therefore
I will be ruled by your supplication. I will even give you
610 the mare, though she is mine, so that these men too may be witnesses
that the heart is never arrogant nor stubborn within me.”
He spoke, and gave Antilochos’ companion, Noëmon,
the mare to lead away, and himself took the glittering cauldron.
Fourth, in the order he had driven, Meriones took up
615 the two talents’ weight of gold. But the fifth prize, the two-handled
jar, was left. Achilleus carried it through the assembly
of the Argives, and gave it to Nestor, and stood by and spoke to him:
“This, aged sir, is yours to lay away as a treasure
in memory of the burial of Patroklos; since never
620 again will you see him among the Argives. I give you this prize
for the giving; since never again will you fight with your fists nor
wrestle,
nor enter again the field for the spear-throwing, nor race
on your feet; since now the hardship of old age is upon you.”
He spoke, and put it in the hands of Nestor, who took it
625 joyfully and spoke in answer and addressed him in winged words:
“Yes, child: all this you said to me was true as you said it.
My limbs are no longer steady, dear friend; not my feet, neither
do my arms, as once they did, swing light from my shoulders.
I wish I were young again and the strength still unshaken within me
630 as once, when great Amaryngkeus was buried by the Epeians
at Bouprasion, and his sons gave games for a king’s funeral.

There, there was no man like me, not among the Epeians
nor yet of the Pylians themselves or great-hearted Aitolians.
At boxing I won against Klytomedes, the son of Enops,
635 at wrestling against Angkaios of Pleuron, who stood up against me.
In the foot-race, for all his speed, I outran Iphiklos,
and with the spear I out-threw Polydoros and Phyleus.
It was only in the chariot-race that the sons of Aktor
defeated me, crossing me in the crowd, so intent on winning
640 were they, for the biggest prizes had been left for the horse-race.
Now these sons of Aktor were twins; one held the reins at his leisure,
held the reins at his leisure while the other lashed on the horses.
This was I, once. Now it is for the young men to encounter
in such actions, and for me to give way to the persuasion
645 of gloomy old age. But once I shone among the young heroes.
Go now, and honor the death of your companion with contests.
I accept this from you gratefully, and my heart is happy
that you have remembered me and my kindness, that I am not forgotten
for the honor that should be my honor among the Achaians.
650 May the gods, for what you have done for me, give you great
happiness.”

He spoke, and Peleides went back among the great numbers
of Achaians assembled, when he had listened to all the praise spoken
by Neleus’ son, and set forth the prizes for the painful boxing.
He led out into the field and tethered there a hard-working
655 six-year-old unbroken jenny, the kind that is hardest
to break; and for the loser set out a two-handled goblet.
He stood upright and spoke his word out among the Argives:
“Son of Atreus, and all you other strong-greaved Achaians,
we invite two men, the best among you, to contend for these prizes
660 with their hands up for the blows of boxing. He whom Apollo
grants to outlast the other, and all the Achaians witness it,
let him lead away the hard-working jenny to his own shelter.
The beaten man shall take away the two-handled goblet.”

He spoke, and a man huge and powerful, well skilled in boxing,
665 rose up among them; the son of Panopeus, Epeios.
He laid his hand on the hard-working jenny, and spoke out:
“Let the man come up who will carry off the two-handled goblet.
I say no other of the Achaians will beat me at boxing
and lead off the jenny. I claim I am the champion. Is it not
670 enough that I fall short in battle? Since it could not be
ever, that a man could be a master in every endeavor.
For I tell you this straight out, and it will be a thing accomplished.
I will smash his skin apart and break his bones on each other.
Let those who care for him wait nearby in a huddle about him
675 to carry him out, after my fists have beaten him under.”
So he spoke, and all of them stayed stricken to silence.
Alone Euryalos stood up to face him, a godlike
man, son of lord Mekisteus of the seed of Talaos;
of him who came once to Thebes and the tomb of Oidipous after
680 his downfall, and there in boxing defeated all the Kadmeians.
The spear-famed son of Tydeus was his second, and talked to him
in encouragement, and much desired the victory for him.
First he pulled on the boxing belt about his waist, and then
gave him the thongs carefully cut from the hide of a ranging
685 ox. The two men, girt up, strode into the midst of the circle
and faced each other, and put up their ponderous hands at the same time
and closed, so that their heavy arms were crossing each other,
and there was a fierce grinding of teeth, the sweat began to run
everywhere from their bodies. Great Epeios came in, and hit him
690 as he peered out from his guard, on the cheek, and he could no longer
keep his feet, but where he stood the glorious limbs gave.
As in the water roughened by the north wind a fish jumps
in the weeds of the beach-break, then the dark water closes above him,
so Euryalos left the ground from the blow, but great-hearted Epeios
695 took him in his arms and set him upright, and his true companions
stood about him, and led him out of the circle, feet dragging
as he spat up the thick blood and rolled his head over on one side.
He was dizzy when they brought him back and set him among them.
But they themselves went and carried off the two-handled goblet.

700

Now Peleides set forth the prizes for the third contest,
for the painful wrestling, at once, and displayed them before the
Danaäns.
There was a great tripod, to set over fire, for the winner.
The Achaians among themselves valued it at the worth of twelve oxen.
But for the beaten man he set in their midst a woman
705 skilled in much work of her hands, and they rated her at four oxen.
He stood upright and spoke his word out among the Argives:
“Rise up, two who would endeavor this prize.” So he spoke
and presently there rose up huge Telamonian Aias,
and resourceful Odysseus rose, who was versed in every advantage.
710 The two men, girt up, strode out into the midst of the circle,
and grappled each other in the hook of their heavy arms, as when
rafters lock, when a renowned architect has fitted them
in the roof of a high house to keep out the force of the winds’ spite.
Their backs creaked under stress of violent hands that tugged them
715 stubbornly, and the running sweat broke out, and raw places
frequent all along their ribs and their shoulders broke out
bright red with blood, as both of them kept up their hard efforts
for success and the prize of the wrought tripod. Neither Odysseus
was able to bring Aias down or throw him to the ground, nor
720 could Aias, but the great strength of Odysseus held out against him.
But now as they made the strong-greaved Achaians begin to be restless,
at last great Telamonian Aias said to the other:
“Son of Laërtes and seed of Zeus, resourceful Odysseus:
lift me, or I will lift you. All success shall be as Zeus gives it.”
725 He spoke, and heaved; but not forgetting his craft Odysseus
caught him with a stroke behind the hollow of the knee, and unnerved
the tendons, and threw him over backward, so that Odysseus
fell on his chest as the people gazed upon them and wondered.
Next, brilliant much-enduring Odysseus endeavored to lift him
730 and budged him a little from the ground, but still could not raise him
clear, then hooked a knee behind, so that both of them went down
together to the ground, and lay close, and were soiled in the dust. Then

they would have sprung to their feet once more and wrestled a third
fall,
had not Achilleus himself stood up and spoken to stop them:
735 “Wrestle no more now; do not wear yourselves out and get hurt.
You have both won. Therefore take the prizes in equal division
and retire, so the rest of the Achaians can have their contests.”
So he spoke, and they listened close to him and obeyed him
and wiped the dust away from their bodies, and put on their tunics.

740

At once the son of Peleus set out prizes for the foot-race:
a mixing bowl of silver, a work of art, which held only
six measures, but for its loveliness it surpassed all others
on earth by far, since skilled Sidonian craftsmen had wrought it
well, and Phoenicians carried it over the misty face of the water
745 and set it in the harbor, and gave it for a present to Thoas.
Euneos, son of Jason, gave it to the hero Patroklos
to buy Lykaon, Priam’s son, out of slavery, and now
Achilleus made it a prize in memory of his companion,
for that man who should prove in the speed of his feet to run lightest.
750 For second place he set out a great ox with fat deep upon him,
and for the last runner half a talent’s weight of gold. He stood
upright then and spoke his word out among the Argives:
“Rise up, you who would endeavor this prize.” So he spoke
and presently there rose up swift Aias, the son of Oïleus,
755 and Odysseus the resourceful rose up, and after him Nestor’s
son, Antilochos, the best runner among all the young men.
They stood in line for the start, and Achilleus showed them the turnpost.
The field was strung out from the scratch, and not long afterward
Oïleus’ son was out in front, but brilliant Odysseus
760 overhauled him close, as near as to the breast of a woman
fair-girdled is the rod she pulls in her hands carefully
as she draws the spool out and along the warp, and holds it
close to her chest. So Odysseus ran close up, but behind him,

and his feet were hitting the other’s tracks before the dust settled.
765 Great Odysseus was breathing on the back of the head of Aias
as he ran and held his speed, and all the Achaians were shouting
for his effort to win, and hallooed him hard along in his running.
But as they were running the last part of the race, then Odysseus
said a prayer inside his own mind to gray-eyed Athene:
770 “Hear me, goddess; be kind; and come with strength for my footsteps.”
So he spoke in prayer, and Pallas Athene heard him.
She made his limbs light, both his feet and the hands above them.
Now as they were for making their final sprint for the trophy,
there Aias slipped in his running, for Athene unbalanced him,
775 where dung was scattered on the ground from the bellowing oxen
slaughtered
by swift-footed Achilleus, those he slew to honor Patroklos;
and his mouth and nose were filled with the cow dung, so that
Odysseus
the great and much enduring took off the mixing bowl, seeing
he had passed him and come in first, and the ox went to glorious Aias.
780 He stood there holding in his hands the horn of the field-ox,
spitting the dung from his mouth, and spoke his word to the Argives:
“Ah, now! That goddess made me slip on my feet, who has always
stood over Odysseus like a mother, and taken good care of him.”
He spoke, and all the rest of them laughed happily at him.
785 In turn Antilochos took up prize for last place, and carried it
off, and grinning spoke his word out among the Argives:
“Friends, you all know well what I tell you, that still the immortals
continue to favor the elder men. For see now, Aias
is elder than I, if only by a little, but this man
790 is out of another age than ours and one of the ancients.
But his, they say, is a green old age. It would be a hard thing
for any Achaian to match his speed. Except for Achilleus.”
So he spoke, and glorified the swift-footed Peleion.
And Achilleus gave him an answer for what he said, and spoke to him:
795 “Antilochos, your good word for me shall not have been spoken
in vain. I shall give you another half-talent of gold in addition.”

He spoke, and put it in Antilochos’ hands, who received it joyfully.
Then the son of Peleus carried into the circle and set down
a far-shadowing spear, and set down beside it a shield and a helmet:
800 the armor of Sarpedon, that Patroklos stripped from his body.
He stood upright and spoke his word out among the Argives:
“We invite two men, the best among you, to contend for these prizes.
Let them draw their armor upon them and take up the rending bronze
spears
and stand up to each other in the trial of close combat. The fighter
805 who is first of the two to get in a stroke at the other’s fair body,
to get through armor and dark blood and reach to the vitals,
to that man I will give this magnificent silver-nailed
sword of Thrace I stripped from the body of Asteropaios.
But let both men carry off this armor and have it in common;
810 and we shall set out a brave dinner before them both in our shelters.”
So he spoke, and there rose up huge Telamonian Aias,
and next the son of Tydeus rose up, strong Diomedes.
When these were in their armor on either side of the assembly,
they came together in the middle space, furious for the combat,
815 with dangerous looks, and wonder settled on all the Achaians.
Then as, moving forward, the two were closing in on each other,
there were three charges, three times they swept in close. Then Aias
stabbed at Diomedes shield on its perfect circle
but did not get through to the skin, for the corselet inside it guarded
him.
820 The son of Tydeus, over the top of the huge shield, was always
menacing the neck of Aias with the point of the shining
spear, but when the Achaians saw it in fear for Aias
they called for them to stop and divide the prizes evenly.
But the hero Achilleus carried the great sword, with its scabbard
825 and carefully cut sword belt, and gave it to Diomedes.
Now the son of Peleus set in place a lump of pig-iron,
which had once been the throwing-weight of Eëtion in his great
strength;
but now swift-footed brilliant Achilleus had slain him and taken

the weight away in the ships along with the other possessions.
830 He stood upright and spoke his word out among the Argives:
“Rise up, you who would endeavor to win this prize also.
For although the rich demesnes of him who wins it lie far off
indeed, yet for the succession of five years he will have it
to use; for his shepherd for want of iron will not have to go in
835 to the city for it, nor his ploughman either. This will supply them.”
So he spoke, and up stood Polypoites the stubborn in battle,
and Leonteus in his great strength, a godlike man, and there rose up
Aias, the son of Telamon, and brilliant Epeios.
They stood in order to throw, and great Epeios took up the weight
840 and whirled and threw it, and all the Achaians laughed when they saw
him.
Second to throw in turn was Leonteus, scion of Ares,
and third in turn huge Telamonian Aias threw it
from his ponderous hand, and overpassed the marks of all others.
But when Polypoites stubborn in battle caught up the iron,
845 he overthrew the entire field by as far as an ox-herd
can cast with his throwing stick which spins through the air and comes
down
where the cattle graze in their herds, and all the Achaians applauded,
and the companions of powerful Polypoites uprising
carried the prize of the king away to the hollow vessels.

850

But Achilleus set gloomy iron forth once more, for the archers.
He set ten double-bladed axes forth, ten with single
blades, and planted far away on the sands the mast pole
of a dark-prowed ship, and tethered a tremulous wild pigeon to it
by a thin string attached to her foot, then challenged the archers
855 to shoot at her: “Now let the man who hits the wild pigeon
take up and carry away home with him all the full axes.
But if one should miss the bird and still hit the string, that man,
seeing that he is the loser, still shall have the half-axes.”
So he spoke, and there rose up in his strength the lord Teukros,

860 and Meriones rose up, Idomeneus’ powerful henchman.
They chose their lots, and shook them up in a brazen helmet,
and Teukros was allotted first place to shoot. He let fly
a strong-shot arrow, but did not promise the lord of archery
that he would accomplish for him a grand sacrifice of lambs first born.
865 He missed the bird, for Apollo begrudged him that, but he did hit
the string beside the foot where the bird was tied, and the tearing
arrow went straight through and cut the string, and the pigeon
soared swift up toward the sky, while the string dropped and dangled
toward the ground. But still the Achaians thundered approval.
870 Meriones in a fury of haste caught the bow from his hand,
but had had out an arrow before, while Teukros was aiming,
and forthwith promised to the one who strikes from afar, Apollo,
that he would accomplish for him a grand sacrifice of lambs first born.
Way up under the clouds he saw the tremulous wild dove
875 and as she circled struck her under the wing in the body
and the shaft passed clean through and out of her, so that it dropped
back
and stuck in the ground beside the foot of Meriones, but the bird
dropped and fell on top of the mast of the dark-prowed vessel
and drooped her neck and the beating wings went slack, and the spirit
880 of life fled swift away from her limbs. Far down from the mast peak
she dropped to earth. And the people gazed upon it and wondered.
Then Meriones gathered up all ten double axes,
but Teukros carried the half-axes back to the hollow ships.
Then the son of Peleus carried into the circle and set down
885 a far-shadowing spear and an unfired cauldron with patterns
of flowers on it, the worth of an ox. And the spear-throwers rose up.
The son of Atreus rose, wide-powerful Agamemnon,
and Meriones rose up, Idomeneus’ powerful henchman.
But now among them spoke swift-footed brilliant Achilleus:
890 “Son of Atreus, for we know how much you surpass all others,
by how much you are greatest for strength among the spear-throwers,
therefore take this prize and keep it and go back to your hollow
ships; but let us give the spear to the hero Meriones;

if your own heart would have it this way, for so I invite you.”
895 He spoke, nor did Agamemnon lord of men disobey him.
The hero gave the bronze spear to Meriones, and thereafter
handed his prize, surpassingly lovely, to the herald Talthybios.

BOOK TWENTY-FOUR

And the games broke up, and the people scattered to go away, each
man
to his fast-running ship, and the rest of them took thought of their
dinner
and of sweet sleep and its enjoyment; only Achilleus
wept still as he remembered his beloved companion, nor did sleep
5 who subdues all come over him, but he tossed from one side to the
other
in longing for Patroklos, for his manhood and his great strength
and all the actions he had seen to the end with him, and the hardships
he had suffered; the wars of men; hard crossing of the big waters.
Remembering all these things he let fall the swelling tears, lying
10 sometimes along his side, sometimes on his back, and now again
prone on his face; then he would stand upright, and pace turning
in distraction along the beach of the sea, nor did dawn rising
escape him as she brightened across the sea and the beaches.
Then, when he had yoked running horses under the chariot
15 he would fasten Hektor behind the chariot, so as to drag him,
and draw him three times around the tomb of Menoitios’ fallen
son, then rest again in his shelter, and throw down the dead man
and leave him to lie sprawled on his face in the dust. But Apollo
had pity on him, though he was only a dead man, and guarded
20 the body from all ugliness, and hid all of it under the golden
aegis, so that it might not be torn when Achilleus dragged it.
So Achilleus in his standing fury outraged great Hektor.
The blessed gods as they looked upon him were filled with compassion
and kept urging clear-sighted Argeïphontes to steal the body.

25 There this was pleasing to all the others, but never to Hera
nor Poseidon, nor the girl of the gray eyes, who kept still
their hatred for sacred Ilion as in the beginning,
and for Priam and his people, because of the delusion of Paris
who insulted the goddesses when they came to him in his courtyard
30 and favored her who supplied the lust that led to disaster.
But now, as it was the twelfth dawn after the death of Hektor,
Phoibos Apollo spoke his word out among the immortals:
“You are hard, you gods, and destructive. Now did not Hektor
burn thigh pieces of oxen and unblemished goats in your honor?
35 Now you cannot bring yourselves to save him, though he is only
a corpse, for his wife to look upon, his child and his mother
and Priam his father, and his people, who presently thereafter
would burn his body in the fire and give him his rites of burial.
No, you gods; your desire is to help this cursed Achilleus
40 within whose breast there are no feelings of justice, nor can
his mind be bent, but his purposes are fierce, like a lion
who when he has given way to his own great strength and his haughty
spirit, goes among the flocks of men, to devour them.
So Achilleus has destroyed pity, and there is not in him
45 any shame; which does much harm to men but profits them also.
For a man must some day lose one who was even closer
than this; a brother from the same womb, or a son. And yet
he weeps for him, and sorrows for him, and then it is over,
for the Destinies put in mortal men the heart of endurance.
50 But this man, now he has torn the heart of life from great Hektor,
ties him to his horses and drags him around his beloved companion’s
tomb; and nothing is gained thereby for his good, or his honor.
Great as he is, let him take care not to make us angry;
for see, he does dishonor to the dumb earth in his fury.”
55 Then bitterly Hera of the white arms answered him, saying:
“What you have said could be true, lord of the silver bow, only
if you give Hektor such pride of place as you give to Achilleus.
But Hektor was mortal, and suckled at the breast of a woman,
while Achilleus is the child of a goddess, one whom I myself
60 nourished and brought up and gave her as bride to her husband

Peleus, one dear to the hearts of the immortals, for you all
went, you gods, to the wedding; and you too feasted among them
and held your lyre, O friend of the evil, faithless forever.”
In turn Zeus who gathers the clouds spoke to her in answer:
65 “Hera, be not utterly angry with the gods, for there shall not
be the same pride of place given both. Yet Hektor also
was loved by the gods, best of all the mortals in Ilion.
I loved him too. He never failed of gifts to my liking.
Never yet has my altar gone without fair sacrifice,
70 the smoke and the savor of it, since that is our portion of honor.
The stealing of him we will dismiss, for it is not possible
to take bold Hektor secretly from Achilleus, since always
his mother is near him night and day; but it would be better
if one of the gods would summon The tis here to my presence
75 so that I can say a close word to her, and see that Achilleus
is given gifts by Priam and gives back the body of Hektor.”

He spoke, and Iris storm-footed sprang away with the message,
and at a point between Samos and Imbros of the high cliffs
plunged in the dark water, and the sea crashed moaning about her.
80 She plummeted to the sea floor like a lead weight which, mounted
along the horn of an ox who ranges the fields, goes downward
and takes death with it to the raw-ravening fish. She found Thetis
inside the hollow of her cave, and gathered about her
sat the rest of the sea goddesses, and she in their midst
85 was mourning the death of her blameless son, who so soon was
destined
to die in Troy of the rich soil, far from the land of his fathers.
Iris the swift-foot came close beside her and spoke to her:
“Rise, Thetis. Zeus whose purposes are infinite calls you.”
In turn Thetis the goddess, the silver-footed, answered her:
90 “What does he, the great god, want with me? I feel shamefast
to mingle with the immortals, and my heart is confused with sorrows.
But I will go. No word shall be in vain, if he says it.”

So she spoke, and shining among the divinities took up
her black veil, and there is no darker garment. She went
95 on her way, and in front of her rapid wind-footed Iris
guided her, and the wave of the water opened about them.
They stepped out on the dry land and swept to the sky. There they
found
the son of Kronos of the wide brows, and gathered about him
sat all the rest of the gods, the blessed, who live forever.
100 She sat down beside Zeus father, and Athene made a place for her.
Hera put into her hand a beautiful golden goblet
and spoke to her to comfort her, and Thetis accepting drank from it.
The father of gods and men began the discourse among them:
“You have come to Olympos, divine Thetis, for all your sorrow,
105 with an unforgotten grief in your heart. I myself know this.
But even so I will tell you why I summoned you hither.
For nine days there has risen a quarrel among the immortals
over the body of Hektor, and Achilleus, stormer of cities.
They keep urging clear-sighted Argeïphontes to steal the body,
110 but I still put upon Achilleus the honor that he has, guarding
your reverence and your love for me into time afterward. Go then
in all speed to the encampment and give to your son this message:
tell him that the gods frown upon him, that beyond all other
immortals I myself am angered that in his heart’s madness
115 he holds Hektor beside the curved ships and did not give him
back. Perhaps in fear of me he will give back Hektor.
Then I will send Iris to Priam of the great heart, with an order
to ransom his dear son, going down to the ships of the Achaians
and bringing gifts to Achilleus which might soft en his anger.”

120

He spoke and the goddess silver-foot Thetis did not disobey him
but descended in a flash of speed from the peaks of Olympos
and made her way to the shelter of her son, and there found him
in close lamentation, and his beloved companions about him
were busy at their work and made ready the morning meal, and there

125 stood a great fleecy sheep being sacrificed in the shelter.
His honored mother came close to him and sat down beside him,
and stroked him with her hand and called him by name and spoke to
him:
“My child, how long will you go on eating your heart out in sorrow
and lamentation, and remember neither your food nor going
130 to bed? It is a good thing even to lie with a woman
in love. For you will not be with me long, but already
death and powerful destiny stand closely above you.
But listen hard to me, for I come from Zeus with a message.
He says that the gods frown upon you, that beyond all other
135 immortals he himself is angered that in your heart’s madness
you hold Hektor beside the curved ships and did not redeem him.
Come, then, give him up and accept ransom for the body.”
Then in turn Achilleus of the swift feet answered her:
“So be it. He can bring the ransom and take off the body,
140 if the Olympian himself so urgently bids it.”
So, where the ships were drawn together, the son and his mother
conversed at long length in winged words. But the son of Kronos
stirred Iris to go down to sacred Ilion, saying:
“Go forth, Iris the swift, leaving your place on Olympos,
145 and go to Priam of the great heart within Ilion, tell him
to ransom his dear son, going down to the ships of the Achaians
and bringing gifts to Achilleus which might soften his anger:
alone, let no other man of the Trojans go with him, but only
let one elder herald attend him, one who can manage
150 the mules and the easily running wagon, so he can carry
the dead man, whom great Achilleus slew, back to the city.
Let death not be a thought in his heart, let him have no fear;
such an escort shall I send to guide him, Argeïphontes
who shall lead him until he brings him to Achilleus. And after
155 he has brought him inside the shelter of Achilleus, neither
will the man himself kill him, but will hold back all the others,
for he is no witless man nor unwatchful, nor is he wicked,
but will in all kindness spare one who comes to him as a suppliant.”

He spoke, and storm-footed Iris swept away with the message
160 and came to the house of Priam.There she found outcry and mourning.
The sons sitting around their father inside the courtyard
made their clothes sodden with their tears, and among them the old
man
sat veiled, beaten into his mantle. Dung lay thick
on the head and neck of the aged man, for he had been rolling
165 in it, he had gathered and smeared it on with his hands. And his
daughters
all up and down the house and the wives of his sons were mourning
as they remembered all those men in their numbers and valor
who lay dead, their lives perished at the hands of the Argives.
The messenger of Zeus stood beside Priam and spoke to him
170 in a small voice, and yet the shivers took hold of his body:
“Take heart, Priam, son of Dardanos, do not be frightened.
I come to you not eyeing you with evil intention
but with the purpose of good toward you. I am a messenger
of Zeus, who far away cares much for you and is pitiful.
175 The Olympian orders you to ransom Hektor the brilliant,
to bring gifts to Achilleus which may soften his anger:
alone, let no other man of the Trojans go with you, but only
let one elder herald attend you, one who can manage
the mules and the easily running wagon, so he can carry
180 the dead man, whom great Achilleus slew, back to the city.
Let death not be a thought in your heart, you need have no fear,
such an escort shall go with you to guide you, Argeïphontes
who will lead you till he brings you to Achilleus. And after
he has brought you inside the shelter of Achilleus, neither
185 will the man himself kill you but will hold back all the others;
for he is no witless man nor unwatchful, nor is he wicked
but will in all kindness spare one who comes to him as a suppliant.”
So Iris the swift-footed spoke and went away from him.
Thereupon he ordered his sons to make ready the easily rolling
190 mule wagon, and to fasten upon it the carrying basket.
He himself went into the storeroom, which was fragrant

and of cedar, and high-ceilinged, with many bright treasures inside it.
He called out to Hekabē his wife, and said to her:
“Dear wife, a messenger came to me from Zeus on Olympos,
195 that I must go to the ships of the Achaians and ransom my dear son,
bringing gifts to Achilleus which may soften his anger.
Come then, tell me. What does it seem best to your own mind
for me to do? My heart, my strength are terribly urgent
that I go there to the ships within the wide army of the Achaians.”
200 So he spoke, and his wife cried out aloud, and answered him:
“Ah me, where has that wisdom gone for which you were famous
in time before, among outlanders and those you rule over?
How can you wish to go alone to the ships of the Achaians
before the eyes of a man who has slaughtered in such numbers
205 such brave sons of yours? The heart in you is iron. For if
he has you within his grasp and lays eyes upon you, that man
who is savage and not to be trusted will not take pity upon you
nor have respect for your rights. Let us sit apart in our palace
now, and weep for Hektor, and the way at the first strong Destiny
210 spun with his life line when he was born, when I gave birth to him,
that the dogs with their shifting feet should feed on him, far from his
parents,
gone down before a stronger man; I wish I could set teeth
in the middle of his liver and eat it. That would be vengeance
for what he did to my son; for he slew him when he was no coward
215 but standing before the men of Troy and the deep-girdled women
of Troy, with no thought in his mind of flight or withdrawal.”
In turn the aged Priam, the godlike, answered her saying:
“Do not hold me back when I would begoing, neither yourself be
a bird of bad omen in my palace. You will not persuade me.
220 If it had been some other who ordered me, one of the mortals,
one of those who are soothsayers, or priests, or diviners,
I might have called it a lie and we might rather have rejected it.
But now, for I myself heard the god and looked straight upon her,
I am going, and this word shall not be in vain. If it is my destiny
225 to die there by the ships of the bronze-armored Achaians,
then I wish that. Achilleus can slay me at once, with my own son

caught in my arms, once I have my fill of mourning above him.”
He spoke, and lifted back the fair covering of his clothes-chest
and from inside took out twelve robes surpassingly lovely
230 and twelve mantles to be worn single, as many blankets,
as many great white cloaks, also the same number of tunics.
He weighed and carried out ten full talents of gold, and brought forth
two shining tripods, and four cauldrons, and brought out a goblet
of surpassing loveliness that the men of Thrace had given him
235 when he went to them with a message, but now the old man spared not
even this in his halls, so much was it his heart’s desire
to ransom back his beloved son. But he drove off the Trojans
all from his cloister walks, scolding them with words of revilement:
“Get out, you failures, you disgraces. Have you not also
240 mourning of your own at home that you come to me with your
sorrows?
Is it not enough that Zeus, son of Kronos, has given me sorrow
in losing the best of my sons? You also shall be
aware of this since you will be all the easier for the Achaians to
slaughter
now he is dead. But, for myself, before my eyes look
245 upon this city as it is destroyed and its people are slaughtered,
my wish is to go sooner down to the house of the death god.”
He spoke, and went after the men with a stick, and they fled outside
before the fury of the old man. He was scolding his children
and cursing Helenos, and Paris, Agathon the brilliant,
250 Pammon and Antiphonos, Polites of the great war cry,
Deïphobos and Hippothoös and proud Dios. There were nine
sons to whom now the old man gave orders and spoke to them roughly:
“Make haste, wicked children, my disgraces. I wish all of you
had been killed beside the running ships in the place of Hektor.
255 Ah me, for my evil destiny. I have had the noblest
of sons in Troy, but I say not one of them is left to me,
Mestor like a god and Troilos whose delight was in horses,
and Hektor, who was a god among men, for he did not seem like
one who was child of a mortal man, but of a god. All these

260 Ares has killed, and all that are left me are the disgraces,
the liars and the dancers, champions of the chorus, the plunderers
of their own people in their land of lambs and kids. Well then,
will you not get my wagon ready and be quick about it,
and put all these things on it, so we can get on with our journey?”
265 So he spoke, and they in terror at the old man’s scolding
hauled out the easily running wagon for mules, a fine thing
new-fabricated, and fastened the carrying basket upon it.
They took away from its peg the mule yoke made of boxwood
with its massive knob, well fitted with guiding rings, and brought forth
270 the yoke lashing (together with the yoke itself) of nine cubits
and snugged it well into place upon the smooth-polished wagon-pole
at the foot of the beam, then slipped the ring over the peg, and lashed it
with three turns on either side to the knob, and afterward
fastened it all in order and secured it under a hooked guard.
275 Then they carried out and piled into the smooth-polished mule wagon
all the unnumbered spoils to be given for the head of Hektor,
then yoked the powerful-footed mules who pulled in the harness
and whom the Mysians gave once as glorious presents to Priam;
but for Priam they led under the yoke those horses the old man
280 himself had kept, and cared for them at his polished manger.
Now in the high house the yoking was done for the herald
and Priam, men both with close counsels in their minds. And now came
Hekabē with sorrowful heart and stood close beside them
carrying in her right hand the kind, sweet wine in a golden
285 goblet, so that before they went they might pour a drink-offering.
She stood in front of the horses, called Priam by name and spoke to
him:
“Here, pour a libation to Zeus father, and pray you may come back
home again from those who hate you, since it seems the spirit
within you drives you upon the ships, though I would not have it.
290 Make your prayer then to the dark-misted, the son of Kronos
on Ida, who looks out on all the Troad, and ask him
for a bird of omen, a rapid messenger, which to his own mind
is dearest of all birds and his strength is the biggest, one seen

on the right, so that once your eyes have rested upon him
295 you can trust in him and go to the ships of the fast-mounted Danaäns.
But if Zeus of the wide brows will not grant you his own messenger,
then I, for one, would never urge you on nor advise you
to go to the Argive ships, for all your passion to do it.”
Then in answer to her again spoke Priam the godlike:
300 “My lady, I will not disregard this wherein you urge me.
It is well to lift hands to Zeus and ask if he will have mercy.”
The old man spoke, and told the housekeeper who attended them
to pour unstained water over his hands. She standing beside them
and serving them held the washing-bowl in her hands, and a pitcher.
305 He washed his hands and took the cup from his wife. He stood up
in the middle of the enclosure, and prayed, and poured the wine out
looking up into the sky, and gave utterance and spoke, saying:
“Father Zeus, watching over us from Ida, most high, most honored:
grant that I come to Achilleus for love and pity; but send me
310 a bird of omen, a rapid messenger which to your own mind
is dearest of all birds and his strength is biggest, one seen
on the right, so that once my eyes have rested upon him
I may trust in him and go to the ships of the fast-mounted Danaäns.”
So he spoke in prayer, and Zeus of the counsels heard him.
315 Straightway he sent down the most lordly of birds, an eagle,
the dark one, the marauder, called as well the black eagle.
And as big as is the build of the door to a towering chamber
in the house of a rich man, strongly fitted with bars, of such size
was the spread of his wings on either side. He swept through the city
320 appearing on the right hand,and the people looking upon him
were uplifted and the hearts made glad in the breasts of all of them.
Now in urgent haste the old man mounted into his chariot
and drove out through the forecourt and the thundering close. Before
him
the mules hauled the wagon on its four wheels, Idaios
325 the sober-minded driving them, and behind him the horses
came on as the old man laid the lash upon them and urged them
rapidly through the town, and all his kinsmen were following

much lamenting, as if he went to his death. When the two men
had gone down through the city, and out, and come to the flat land,
330 the rest of them turned back to go to Ilion, the sons
and the sons-in-law. And Zeus of the wide brows failed not to notice
the two as they showed in the plain. He saw the old man and took pity
upon him, and spoke directly to his beloved son, Hermes:
“Hermes, for to you beyond all other gods it is dearest
335 to be man’s companion, and you listen to whom you will, go now
on your way, and so guide Priam inside the hollow ships
of the Achaians, that no man shall see him, none be aware of him,
of the other Danaäns, till he has come to the son of Peleus.”
He spoke, nor disobeyed him the courier, Argeïphontes.
340 Immediately he bound upon his feet the fair sandals
golden and immortal, that carried him over the water
as over the dry land of the main abreast of the wind’s blast.
He caught up the staff, with which he mazes the eyes of those mortals
whose eyes he would maze, or wakes again the sleepers. Holding
345 this in his hands, strong Argeïphontes winged his way onward
until he came suddenly to Troy and the Hellespont, and there
walked on, and there took the likeness of a young man, a noble,
with beard new grown, which is the most graceful time of young
manhood.
Now when the two had driven past the great tomb of Ilos
350 they stayed their mules and horses to water them in the river,
for by this time darkness had descended on the land; and the herald
made out Hermes, who was coming toward them at a short distance.
He lifted his voice and spoke aloud to Priam: “Take thought,
son of Dardanos. Here is work for a mind that is careful.
355 I see a man; I think he will presently tear us to pieces.
Come then, let us run away with our horses, or if not, then
clasp his knees and entreat him to have mercy upon us.”
So he spoke, and the old man’s mind was confused, he was badly
frightened, and the hairs stood up all over his gnarled body
360 and he stood staring, but the kindly god himself coming closer
took the old man’s hand, and spoke to him and asked him a question:

“Where, my father, are you thus guiding your mules and horses
through the immortal night while other mortals are sleeping?
Have you no fear of the Achaians whose wind is fury,
365 who hate you, who are your enemies, and are near? For if one
of these were to see you, how you are conveying so many
treasures through the swift black night, what then could you think of?
You are not young yourself, and he who attends you is aged
for beating off any man who might pick a quarrel with you.
370 But I will do you no harm myself, I will even keep off
another who would. You seem to me like a beloved father.”
In answer to him again spoke aged Priam the godlike:
“Yes, in truth, dear child, all this is much as you tell me;
yet still there is some god who has held his hand above me,
375 who sent such a wayfarer as you to meet me, an omen
of good, for such you are by your form, your admired beauty
and the wisdom in your mind. Your parents are fortunate in you.”
Then in turn answered him the courier Argeïphontes:
“Yes, old sir, all this that you said is fair and orderly.
380 But come, tell me this thing and recite it to me accurately.
Can it be you convey these treasures in all their numbers and beauty
to outland men, so that they can be still kept safe for you?
Or are all of you by now abandoning sacred Ilion
in fear, such a one was he who died, the best man among you,
385 your son; who was never wanting when you fought against the
Achaians.”
In answer to him again spoke aged Priam the godlike:
“But who are you, O best of men, and who are your parents?
Since you spoke of my ill-starred son’s death, and with honor.”
Then in turn answered him the courier Argeïphontes:
390 “You try me out, aged sir. You ask me of glorious Hektor
whom many a time my eyes have seen in the fighting where men win
glory, as also on that time when he drove back the Argives
on their ships and kept killing them with the stroke of the sharp bronze,
and we stood by and wondered at him; for then Achilleus
395 would not let us fight by reason of his anger at Agamemnon.
For I am Achilleus’ henchman, and the same strong-wrought vessel

brought us here; and I am a Myrmidon, and my father
is Polyktor; a man of substance, but aged, as you are.
He has six sons beside, and I am the seventh, and I shook
400 lots with the others, and it was my lot to come on this venture.
But now I have come to the plain away from the ships, for at daybreak
the glancing-eyed Achaians will do battle around the city.
They chafe from sitting here too long, nor have the Achaians’
kings the strength to hold them back as they break for the fighting.”
405 In answer to him again spoke aged Priam the godlike:
“If then you are henchman to Peleïd Achilleus,
come, tell me the entire truth, and whether my son lies
still beside the ships, or whether by now he has been hewn
limb from limb and thrown before the dogs by Achilleus.”
410 Then in turn answered him the courier Argeïphontes:
“Aged sir, neither have any dogs eaten him, nor have
the birds, but he lies yet beside the ship of Achilleus
at the shelters, and as he was; now here is the twelfth dawn
he has lain there, nor does his flesh decay, nor do worms feed
415 on him, they who devour men who have fallen in battle.
It is true, Achilleus drags him at random around his beloved
companion’s tomb, as dawn on dawn appears, yet he cannot
mutilate him; you yourself can see when you go there
how fresh with dew he lies, and the blood is all washed from him,
420 nor is there any corruption, and all the wounds have been closed up
where he was struck, since many drove the bronze in his body.
So it is that the blessed immortals care for your son, though
he is nothing but a dead man; because in their hearts they loved him.”
He spoke, and the old man was made joyful and answered him,
saying:
425 “My child, surely it is good to give the immortals
their due gifts; because my own son, if ever I had one,
never forgot in his halls the gods who live on Olympos.
Therefore they remembered him even in death’s stage. Come, then,
accept at my hands this beautiful drinking-cup, and give me
430 protection for my body, and with the gods’ grace be my escort
until I make my way to the shelter of the son of Peleus.”

In turn answered him the courier Argeïphontes:
“You try me out, aged sir, for I am young, but you will not
persuade me, telling me to accept your gifts when Achilleus
435 does not know. I fear him at heart and have too much reverence
to rob him. Such a thing might be to my sorrow hereafter.
But I would be your escort and take good care of you, even
till I came to glorious Argos in a fast ship or following
on foot, and none would fight you because he despised your escort.”

440

The kind god spoke, and sprang up behind the horses and into
the chariot, and rapidly caught in his hands the lash and the guide reins,
and breathed great strength into the mules and horses. Now after
they had got to the fortifications about the ships, and the ditch, there
were sentries, who had just begun to make ready their dinner,
445 but about these the courier Argeïphontes drifted
sleep, on all, and quickly opened the gate, and shoved back
the door-bars, and brought in Priam and the glorious gifts on the
wagon.
But when they had got to the shelter of Peleus’ son: a towering
shelter the Myrmidons had built for their king, hewing
450 the timbers of pine, and they made a roof of thatch above it
shaggy with grass that they had gathered out of the meadows;
and around it made a great courtyard for their king, with hedgepoles
set close together; the gate was secured by a single door-piece
of pine, and three Achaians could ram it home in its socket
455 and three could pull back and open the huge door-bar; three other
Achaians, that is, but Achilleus all by himself could close it.
At this time Hermes, the kind god, opened the gate for the old man
and brought in the glorious gifts for Peleus’ son, the swift-footed,
and dismounted to the ground from behind the horses, and spoke forth:
460 “Aged sir, I who came to you am a god immortal,
Hermes. My father sent me down to guide and go with you.
But now I am going back again, and I will not go in
before the eyes of Achilleus, for it would make others angry

for an immortal god so to face mortal men with favor.
465 But go you in yourself and clasp the knees of Peleion
and entreat him in the name of his father, the name of his mother
of the lovely hair, and his child, and so move the spirit within him.”
So Hermes spoke, and went away to the height of Olympos,
but Priam vaulted down to the ground from behind the horses
470 and left Idaios where he was, for he stayed behind, holding
in hand the horses and mules. The old man made straight for the
dwelling
where Achilleus the beloved of Zeus was sitting. He found him
inside, and his companions were sitting apart, as two only,
Automedon the hero and Alkimos, scion of Ares,
475 were busy beside him. He had just now got through with his dinner,
with eating and drinking, and the table still stood by. Tall Priam
came in unseen by the other men and stood close beside him
and caught the knees of Achilleus in his arms, and kissed the hands
that were dangerous and manslaughtering and had killed so many
480 of his sons. As when dense disaster closes on one who has murdered
a man in his own land, and he comes to the country of others,
to a man of substance, and wonder seizes on those who behold him,
so Achilleus wondered as he looked on Priam, a godlike
man, and the rest of them wondered also, and looked at each other.
485 But now Priam spoke to him in the words of a suppliant:
“Achilleus like the gods, remember your father, one who
is of years like mine, and on the door-sill of sorrowful old age.
And they who dwell nearby encompass him and afflict him,
nor is there any to defend him against the wrath, the destruction.
490 Yet surely he, when he hears of you and that you are still living,
is gladdened within his heart and all his days he is hopeful
that he will see his beloved son come home from the Troad.
But for me, my destiny was evil. I have had the noblest
of sons in Troy, but I say not one of them is left to me.
495 Fifty were my sons, when the sons of the Achaians came here.
Nineteen were born to me from the womb of a single mother,
and other women bore the rest in my palace; and of these
violent Ares broke the strength in the knees of most of them,

but one was left me who guarded my city and people, that one
500 you killed a few days since as he fought in defense of his country,
Hektor; for whose sake I come now to the ships of the Achaians
to win him back from you, and I bring you gifts beyond number.
Honor then the gods, Achilleus, and take pity upon me
remembering your father, yet I am still more pitiful;
505 I have gone through what no other mortal on earth has gone through;
I put my lips to the hands of the man who has killed my children.”
So he spoke, and stirred in the other a passion of grieving
for his own father. He took the old man’s hand and pushed him
gently away, and the two remembered, as Priam sat huddled
510 at the feet of Achilleus and wept close for manslaughtering Hektor
and Achilleus wept now for his own father, now again
for Patroklos. The sound of their mourning moved in the house. Then
when great Achilleus had taken full satisfaction in sorrow
and the passion for it had gone from his mind and body, thereafter
515 he rose from his chair, and took the old man by the hand, and set him
on his feet again, in pity for the gray head and the gray beard,
and spoke to him and addressed him in winged words: “Ah, unlucky,
surely you have had much evil to endure in your spirit.
How could you dare to come alone to the ships of the Achaians
520 and before my eyes, when I am one who have killed in such numbers
such brave sons of yours? The heart in you is iron. Come, then,
and sit down upon this chair, and you and I will even let
our sorrows lie still in the heart for all our grieving. There is not
any advantage to be won from grim lamentation.
525 Such is the way the gods spun life for unfortunate mortals,
that we live in unhappiness, but the gods themselves have no sorrows.
There are two urns that stand on the door-sill of Zeus. They are unlike
for the gifts they bestow: an urn of evils, an urn of blessings.
If Zeus who delights in thunder mingles these and bestows them
530 on man, he shifts, and moves now in evil, again in good fortune.
But when Zeus bestows from the urn of sorrows, he makes a failure
of man, and the evil hunger drives him over the shining
earth, and he wanders respected neither of gods nor mortals.
Such were the shining gifts given by the gods to Peleus

535 from his birth, who outshone all men beside for his riches
and pride of possession, and was lord over the Myrmidons. Thereto
the gods bestowed an immortal wife on him, who was mortal.
But even on him the god piled evil also. There was not
any generation of strong sons born to him in his great house
540 but a single all-untimely child he had, and I give him
no care as he grows old, since far from the land of my fathers
I sit here in Troy, and bring nothing but sorrow to you and your
children.
And you, old sir, we are told you prospered once; for as much
as Lesbos, Makar’s hold, confines to the north above it
545 and Phrygia from the north confines, and enormous Hellespont,
of these, old sir, you were lord once in your wealth and your children.
But now the Uranian gods brought us, an affliction upon you,
forever there is fighting about your city, and men killed.
But bear up, nor mourn endlessly in your heart, for there is not
550 anything to be gained from grief for your son; you will never
bring him back; sooner you must go through yet another sorrow.”
In answer to him again spoke aged Priam the godlike:
“Do not, beloved of Zeus, make me sit on a chair while Hektor
lies yet forlorn among the shelters; rather with all speed
555 give him back, so my eyes may behold him, and accept the ransom
we bring you, which is great. You may have joy of it, and go back
to the land of your own fathers, since once you have permitted me
to go on living myself and continue to look on the sunlight.”
Then looking darkly at him spoke swift-footed Achilleus:
560 “No longer stir me up, old sir. I myself am minded
to give Hektor back to you. A messenger came to me from Zeus,
my mother, she who bore me, the daughter of the sea’s ancient.
I know you, Priam, in my heart, and it does not escape me
that some god led you to the running ships of the Achaians.
565 For no mortal would dare come to our encampment, not even
one strong in youth. He could not get by the pickets, he could not
lightly unbar the bolt that secures our gateway. Therefore
you must not further make my spirit move in my sorrows,
for fear, old sir, I might not let you alone in my shelter,

570 suppliant as you are; and be guilty before the god’s orders.”
He spoke, and the old man was frightened and did as he told him.
The son of Peleus bounded to the door of the house like a lion,
nor went alone, but the two henchmen followed attending,
the hero Automedon and Alkimos, those whom Achilleus
575 honored beyond all companions after Patroklos dead. These two
now set free from under the yoke the mules and the horses,
and led inside the herald, the old king’s crier, and gave him
a chair to sit in, then from the smooth-polished mule wagon
lifted out the innumerable spoils for the head of Hektor,
580 but left inside it two great cloaks and a finespun tunic
to shroud the corpse in when they carried him home. Then Achilleus
called out to his serving-maids to wash the body and anoint it
all over; but take it first aside, since otherwise Priam
might see his son and in the heart’s sorrow not hold in his anger
585 at the sight, and the deep heart in Achilleus be shaken to anger;
that he might not kill Priam and be guilty before the god’s orders.
Then when the serving-maids had washed the corpse and anointed it
with olive oil, they threw a fair great cloak and a tunic
about him, and Achilleus himself lifted him and laid him
590 on a litter, and his friends helped him lift it to the smooth-polished
mule wagon. He groaned then, and called by name on his beloved
companion:
“Be not angry with me, Patroklos, if you discover,
though you be in the house of Hades, that I gave back great Hektor
to his loved father, for the ransom he gave me was not unworthy.
595 I will give you your share of the spoils, as much as is fitting.”
So spoke great Achilleus and went back into the shelter
and sat down on the elaborate couch from which he had risen,
against the inward wall, and now spoke his word to Priam:
“Your son is given back to you, aged sir, as you asked it.
600 He lies on a bier. When dawn shows you yourself shall see him
as you take him away. Now you and I must remember our supper.
For even Niobē, she of the lovely tresses, remembered
to eat, whose twelve children were destroyed in her palace,

six daughters, and six sons in the pride of their youth, whom Apollo
605 killed with arrows from his silver bow, being angered
with Niobē, and shaft-showering Artemis killed the daughters;
because Niobē likened herself to Leto of the fair coloring
and said Leto had borne only two, she herself had borne many;
but the two, though they were only two, destroyed all those others.
610 Nine days long they lay in their blood, nor was there anyone
to bury them, for the son of Kronos made stones out of
the people; but on the tenth day the Uranian gods buried them.
But she remembered to eat when she was worn out with weeping.
And now somewhere among the rocks, in the lonely mountains,
615 in Sipylos, where they say is the resting place of the goddesses
who are nymphs, and dance beside the waters of Acheloios,
there, stone still, she broods on the sorrows that the gods gave her.
Come then, we also, aged magnificent sir, must remember
to eat, and afterward you may take your beloved son back
620 to Ilion, and mourn for him; and he will be much lamented.”
So spoke fleet Achilleus and sprang to his feet and slaughtered
a gleaming sheep, and his friends skinned it and butchered it fairly,
and cut up the meat expertly into small pieces, and spitted them,
and roasted all carefully and took off the pieces.
625 Automedon took the bread and set it out on the table
in fair baskets, while Achilleus served the meats. And thereon
they put their hands to the good things that lay ready before them.
But when they had put aside their desire for eating and drinking,
Priam, son of Dardanos, gazed upon Achilleus, wondering
630 at his size and beauty, for he seemed like an outright vision
of gods. Achilleus in turn gazed on Dardanian Priam
and wondered, as he saw his brave looks and listened to him talking.
But when they had taken their fill of gazing one on the other,
first of the two to speak was the aged man, Priam the godlike:
635 “Give me, beloved of Zeus, a place to sleep presently, so that
we may even go to bed and take the pleasure of sweet sleep.
For my eyes have not closed underneath my lids since that time
when my son lost his life beneath your hands, but always
I have been grieving and brooding over my numberless sorrows

640 and wallowed in the muck about my courtyard’s enclosure.
Now I have tasted food again and have let the gleaming
wine go down my throat. Before, I had tasted nothing.”
He spoke, and Achilleus ordered his serving-maids and companions
to make a bed in the porch’s shelter and to lay upon it
645 fine underbedding of purple, and spread blankets above it
and fleecy robes to be an over-all covering. The maid-servants
went forth from the main house, and in their hands held torches,
and set to work, and presently had two beds made. Achilleus
of the swift feet now looked at Priam and said, sarcastic:
650 “Sleep outside, aged sir and good friend, for fear some Achaian
might come in here on a matter of counsel, since they keep coming
and sitting by me and making plans; as they are supposed to.
But if one of these come through the fleeting black night should notice
you,
he would go straight and tell Agamemnon, shepherd of the people,
655 and there would be delay in the ransoming of the body.
But come, tell me this and count off for me exactly
how many days you intend for the burial of great Hektor.
Tell me, so I myself shall stay still and hold back the people.”
In answer to him again spoke aged Priam the godlike:
660 “If you are willing that we accomplish a complete funeral
for great Hektor, this, Achilleus, is what you could do and give
me pleasure. For you know surely how we are penned in our city,
and wood is far to bring in from the hills, and the Trojans are frightened
badly. Nine days we would keep him in our palace and mourn him,
665 and bury him on the tenth day, and the people feast by him,
and on the eleventh day we would make the grave-barrow for him,
and on the twelfth day fight again; if so we must do.”
Then in turn swift-footed brilliant Achilleus answered him:
“Then all this, aged Priam, shall be done as you ask it.
670 I will hold off our attack for as much time as you bid me.”
So he spoke, and took the aged king by the right hand
at the wrist, so that his heart might have no fear. Then these two,
Priam and the herald who were both men of close counsel,
slept in the place outside the house, in the porch’s shelter;

675 but Achilleus slept in the inward corner of the strong-built shelter,
and at his side lay Briseis of the fair coloring.
Now the rest of the gods and men who were lords of chariots
slept nightlong, with the easy bondage of slumber upon them,
only sleep had not caught Hermes the kind god, who pondered
680 now in his heart the problem of how to escort King Priam
from the ships and not be seen by the devoted gate-wardens.
He stood above his head and spoke a word to him, saying:
“Aged sir, you can have no thought of evil from the way
you sleep still among your enemies now Achilleus has left you
685 unharmed. You have ransomed now your dear son and given much for
him.
But the sons you left behind would give three times as much ransom
for you, who are alive, were Atreus’ son Agamemnon
to recognize you, and all the other Achaians learn of you.”
He spoke, and the old man was afraid, and wakened his herald,
690 and lightly Hermes harnessed for them the mules and the horses
and himself drove them through the encampment. And no man knew of
them.
But when they came to the crossing-place of the fair-running river,
of whirling Xanthos, a stream whose father was Zeus the immortal,
there Hermes left them and went away to the height of Olympos,
695 and dawn, she of the yellow robe, scattered over all earth,
and they drove their horses on to the city with lamentation
and clamor, while the mules drew the body. Nor was any other
aware of them at the first, no man, no fair-girdled woman,
only Kassandra, a girl like Aphrodite the golden,
700 who had gone up to the height of the Pergamos. She saw
her dear father standing in the chariot, his herald and crier
with him. She saw Hektor drawn by the mules on a litter.
She cried out then in sorrow and spoke to the entire city:
“Come, men of Troy and Trojan women; look upon Hektor
705 if ever before you were joyful when you saw him come back living
from battle; for he was a great joy to his city, and all his people.”
She spoke, and there was no man left there in all the city

nor woman, but all were held in sorrow passing endurance.
They met Priam beside the gates as he brought the dead in.
710 First among them were Hektor’s wife and his honored mother
who tore their hair, and ran up beside the smooth-rolling wagon,
and touched his head. And the multitude, wailing, stood there about
them.
And now and there in front of the gates they would have lamented
all day till the sun went down and let fall their tears for Hektor,
715 except that the old man spoke from the chariot to his people:
“Give me way to get through with my mules; then afterward
you may sate yourselves with mourning, when I have him inside the
palace.”
So he spoke, and they stood apart and made way for the wagon.
And when they had brought him inside the renowned house, they laid
him
720 then on a carved bed, and seated beside him the singers
who were to lead the melody in the dirge, and the singers
chanted the song of sorrow, and the women were mourning beside
them.
Andromachē of the white arms led the lamentation
of the women, and held in her arms the head of manslaughtering
Hektor:
725 “My husband, you were lost young from life, and have left me
a widow in your house, and the boy is only a baby
who was born to you and me, the unhappy. I think he will never
come of age, for before then head to heel this city
will be sacked, for you, its defender, are gone, you who guarded
730 the city, and the grave wives, and the innocent children,
wives who before long must go away in the hollow ships,
and among them I shall also go, and you, my child, follow
where I go, and there do much hard work that is unworthy
of you, drudgery for a hard master; or else some Achaian
735 will take you by hand and hurl you from the tower into horrible
death, in anger because Hektor once killed his brother,
or his father, or his son; there were so many Achaians

whose teeth bit the vast earth, beaten down by the hands of Hektor.
Your father was no merciful man in the horror of battle.
740 Therefore your people are grieving for you all through their city,
Hektor, and you left for your parents mourning and sorrow
beyond words, but for me passing all others is left the bitterness
and the pain, for you did not die in bed, and stretch your arms to me,
nor tell me some last intimate word that I could remember
745 always, all the nights and days of my weeping for you.”
So she spoke in tears, and the women were mourning about her.
Now Hekabē led out the thronging chant of their sorrow:
“Hektor, of all my sons the dearest by far to my spirit;
while you still lived for me you were dear to the gods, and even
750 in the stage of death they cared about you still. There were others
of my sons whom at times swift-footed Achilleus captured,
and he would sell them as slaves far across the unresting salt water
into Samos, and Imbros, and Lemnos in the gloom of the mists. You,
when he had taken your life with the thin edge of the bronze sword,
755 he dragged again and again around his beloved companion’s
tomb, Patroklos’, whom you killed, but even so did not
bring him back to life. Now you lie in the palace, handsome
and fresh with dew, in the likeness of one whom he of the silver
bow, Apollo, has attacked and killed with his gentle arrows.”

760

So she spoke, in tears, and wakened the endless mourning.
Third and last Helen led the song of sorrow among them:
“Hektor, of all my lord’s brothers dearest by far to my spirit:
my husband is Alexandros, like an immortal, who brought me
here to Troy; and I should have died before I came with him;
765 and here now is the twentieth year upon me since I came
from the place where I was, forsaking the land of my fathers. In this
time
I have never heard a harsh saying from you, nor an insult.
No, but when another, one of my lord’s brothers or sisters, a fair-robed

wife of some brother, would say a harsh word to me in the palace,
770 or my lord’s mother—but his father was gentle always, a father
indeed—then you would speak and put them off and restrain them
by your own gentleness of heart and your gentle words. Therefore
I mourn for you in sorrow of heart and mourn myself also
and my ill luck. There was no other in all the wide Troad
775 who was kind to me, and my friend; all others shrank when they saw
me.”
So she spoke in tears, and the vast populace grieved with her.
Now Priam the aged king spoke forth his word to his people:
“Now, men of Troy, bring timber into the city, and let not
your hearts fear a close ambush of the Argives. Achilleus
780 promised me, as he sent me on my way from the black ships,
that none should do us injury until the twelfth dawn comes.”
He spoke, and they harnessed to the wagons their mules and their
oxen
and presently were gathered in front of the city. Nine days
they spent bringing in an endless supply of timber. But when
785 the tenth dawn had shone forth with her light upon mortals,
they carried out bold Hektor, weeping, and set the body
aloft a towering pyre for burning. And set fire to it.
But when the young dawn showed again with her rosy fingers,
the people gathered around the pyre of illustrious Hektor.
790 But when all were gathered to one place and assembled together,
first with gleaming wine they put out the pyre that was burning,
all where the fury of the fire still was in force, and thereafter
the brothers and companions of Hektor gathered the white bones
up, mourning, as the tears swelled and ran down their cheeks. Then
795 they laid what they had gathered up in a golden casket
and wrapped this about with soft robes of purple, and presently
put it away in the hollow of the grave, and over it
piled huge stones laid close together. Lightly and quickly
they piled up the grave-barrow, and on all sides were set watchmen
800 for fear the strong-greaved Achaians might too soon set upon them.
They piled up the grave-barrow and went away, and thereafter

assembled in a fair gathering and held a glorious
feast within the house of Priam, king under God’s hand.
Such was their burial of Hektor, breaker of horses.

Notes to the Iliad

These notes, while not comprehensive, seek to illuminate points of mythology, social structure,
material culture, and poetic convention that might lead readers to a fuller appreciation of the epic.
The style and design of the poem as a whole have always been kept in mind. Thus, some passages
that might have been clear enough without further annotation serve as prompts to the discussion of
broader compositional trends. Brief identifications of many persons and places have been left to the
glossary reprinted from the original edition. The line numbers match Lattimore’s, which in almost all
cases exactly correspond to the numbering of verses in the Oxford Classical Text of D. B. Monro and
T. W. Allen (3rd edition, 1919).
The notes (as in the introduction) draw on the latest Homeric scholarship, to which the
bibliography records my debt. I have relied heavily on the most recent full English commentary (Kirk
et al., The Iliad: A Commentary [1985]), and to a lesser extent on the older notes by Leaf in A
Companion to the Iliad for English Readers (1892), and in his The Iliad (1900). While making a
conscious effort to avoid overlap with the existing companions by Willcock (A Companion to the
Iliad [1976]), Postlethwaite (Homer’s Iliad [2000]), and Jones (Homer’s “Iliad” [2003]), and the
notes by the late Bernard Knox to the Fagles translation (Homer: The Iliad [1990]), I have inevitably
commented on many of the same passages, in what I hope is a complementary fashion. On several
points, the ongoing German commentary by Latacz and others has been a help, as have commentaries
on individual books (especially Macleod (Homer: Iliad, Book XXIV [1982]) and Chantraine and
Goube (Iliade: Chant XXIII [1964]).
Numbers pinpoint the starting line of the scene to be elucidated. Citations of more distant Iliad
passages are by book and line number only; those to book and lines of the Odyssey are headed “Od.”
BOOK ONE

1

The opening word of the Iliad, “anger” (mênis), announces the theme of the poem. The word

designates not just ordinary anger but the particularly destructive wrath possessed by a god:
Achilleus is the only mortal whose emotion is so described.

The Muse is asked to “sing” the story, a reminder both that long poems could be
accompanied by music, and that the Muses (daughters of Memory) are the ultimate preservers
of traditional lore and wisdom. Poets are their mouthpieces. This type of invocation became
standard for epics and hymns to gods in ancient Greek and in later literary imitations.
4

Heroes. Any warrior in Homeric epic can be designated with this word, not just outstanding

protagonists of a story, since all are thought to be far beyond average in their abilities.
5

Will of Zeus. Two possible references: before the events of the Iliad, Zeus had promised Earth

(Gaia) to relieve the oppressive weight of people on her surface, and allowed the Trojan War to
lessen the population (as the now lost epic Cypria narrated). Within the time frame of the Iliad, the
fulfillment of Zeus’ will can refer to the carrying out of his plan (at Thetis’ request) to honor
Achilleus by letting his comrades suffer in his absence.
14

Heralds, suppliants, and kings all carry the skêptron (“scepter” or “staff”) as a token of their

special status. The fillets, or ribbons, were pieces of wool attached as a further marker of protection
by the god: participants in sacrifice or ritual meals also wore them.
17

Greaves are shin protectors. The consistent use of the epithet “strong-greaved” for Greek

warriors may refer to a distinctive form of armor they possessed, although in general both sides in the
war appear similarly equipped.
26

A first glimpse of Agamemnon’s character: harsh, arrogant, and selfish. Through-out the poem,

character is developed largely through the speeches made by various figures.
44

The typical scene (a mortal prays and a god answers) is made distinctive by the extended

description of the god’s arrival, “as night comes down,” combining sound (the clanging of his arrows
on his quiver) and sight (the blackness of night’s descent parallel to Apollo’s coming down from
Olympos, the gods’ mountain home).
53

A common pattern: nine days or years represent an unmarked stretch of time that is then

contrasted with and fulfilled by a significant tenth day or year. The ten years of the war itself fit this
template.
59

In contrast to Agamemnon, Achilleus’ first words are reasonable and calm, seeking an

explanation for events. Significantly, he is the first among the warriors and their leaders to question
the status quo and seek to improve conditions.

62

The division of work among religious specialists is noteworthy. Priests were closely associated

with sacrifice (but not absolutely needed for carrying it out, since chieftains like Nestor and
Agamemnon can do so on their own). Dream interpreters are less commonly mentioned, although we
know of their existence throughout antiquity. Seers (like Kalchas in the Iliad) provide useful advice
on everything from religious obligations to navigation and morality (cf. Theoklymenos in Odyssey
17). It is another deft touch of characterization that Achilleus instantly recognizes that any one of
these specialists might be called for.
81 The faulty king is literally dyspeptic, unable to “swallow down” his anger. Later Greek literature
characterizes hubristic transgressors as those unable to “keep down” prosperity (Pindar, Solon), as if
physical and ethical systems are interconnected.
91

“Greatest of all the Achaians” is a formulaic phrase that properly designates Achilleus, but is

applied to various other Greeks while he is out of the battle. Its employment for Agamemnon sounds
ironic in Achilleus’ speech.
106 The failure of Kalchas to ever foretell good may allude to the sacrifice of Agamemnon’s
daughter Iphigeneia, which, according to other sources, the seer is said to have advised as the will of
Artemis.
118 Another ironic touch of characterization. No sooner does Agamemnon express his desire to keep
the troops safe than he makes a move to grab another’s prize of honor: precisely the action that will
lead to the destruction of his warriors.
125 Achilleus mentions carrying out twenty-three earlier raids (9.328–29). Andromachē tells Hektor
about one of these, in which Achilleus killed her father (6.414–16); the same raid yielded the war
prize Chryseis (1.365–69).
138 The three singled out—Aias, Odysseus, Achilleus—are those whose ships, drawn up onshore,
mark the extreme ends and middle of the Greek camp (11.5–9).
154 A list of the most common causes for counterraiding: theft of cattle or horses, and destruction of
crops. Military action to recover a wife appears less glorious and less common. The epithet Achilleus
hurls at Agamemnon (dog-faced) is the same that Helen applies to herself (3.180), perhaps
significantly as the topic here is her husband and brother-in-law.

186 The core of the dispute—might versus authority—is put by Agamemnon with two comparative
adjectives: Achilleus may be karteros (“mightier”) but that is almost accidental, the gift of an
unnamed god (1.177), whereas he himself is more powerful (pherteros), which, he implies, results
from being honored by Zeus (1.175). Angered by Achilleus’ implication that a single warrior should
profit as much as the expedition’s leader, Agamemnon seizes the opportunity to make good on his
earlier threat (1.137–39) and thus scare off other potential competitors for power.
188 A type-scene of decision making. Cf. the same phrase used to describe Diomedes hesitating
about continuing the assault at 8.167. In Homeric psychology heroic action involves such internal
contests; poetically, such moments foreshadow a course of action while holding out the possibility of
alternative plots.
203 The Greek word translated by “outrageousness” is hubris, an arrogant abuse of power stemming
from excessive pride and self-centeredness, often in defiance of divine will.
234 Achilleus’ description of the royal scepter as dead wood contrasted with its original flourishing
state is clearly a negative characterization of Agamemnon’s regime. He identifies himself as “best of
the Achaians” at 244 (contrast 1.91).
247 Nestor’s long speeches are evidence of his honeyed, fluent rhetoric, not an old man’s
talkativeness. His advice is taken seriously at all times (although Agamemnon begins to resist it
here). The reminiscences of the ancient warrior of Pylos (a place famous in Mykenaian times)
provide a glimpse into the world of a generation or two before the Trojan War. The battle recalled
here was between the Lapiths, a tribe of men in Thessaly, and their neighbors the Centaurs, half men,
half horses living around Mount Pelion. Theseus, king of Athens, intervened to aid his friend
Peirithoös, whose wedding to Hippodameia was overrun by these lascivious beast-men. The couple’s
son Polypoites is a chieftain of the Lapiths at Troy (2.738–44).
307 Patroklos, companion of Achilleus, will play a major role in the unfolding drama.
313 The purification is to remove the pollution (miasma) caused by angering Apollo in dishonoring
his priest Chryses. The subsequent “hecatomb” (literally, a sacrifice of one hundred cows—though
here it comprises goats and bulls) is meant to make amends with the god.
331 Achilleus as head of his Myrmidon troops can be called “king,” like Agamemnon, but the latter
functions as an overlord, a first among equals for the Greek leaders, each of whom possesses a sort of
localized royalty.

349 It was not unmanly for heroes to weep under pressures of grief and loss. The poet does not
prolong the scene of departing with a depiction of emotional states, other than to say that Briseis
went unwillingly. Achilleus restrains his tears until he finds solitude at the shore.
352 Achilleus seems to think that a connection with divinity (through his goddess mother) should
ensure being honored by Zeus (the sort of honor Agamemnon claims at 1.175). If emphasis is placed
on the adjective “with a short life,” his logic is different: since he is fated to die young, he should
have god-given honor. In the latter case, he alludes to the prophecy once given him by Thetis and
referred to explicitly only at 9.410–16 (that he can choose a short life with glory or a long life
without it).
395 Just as mortals ask return favors from a god by recalling the sacrifices they have made (compare
Chryses’ prayer at 1.40–42), so Thetis can request aid for her son (Achilleus imagines) because she
once helped Zeus in a dispute with his fellow Olympian gods. The hundred-handed Briareus is a
primeval creature, son of Earth (Gaia) and Sky (Ouranos), who in Hesiod’s Theogony is said to have
aided Zeus in his struggles against an older divine generation, the Titans. Other sources make him a
son-in-law of Poseidon or son of the sea, perhaps to explain his association with the sea nymph
Thetis.
407 Clasping the knees is the regular gesture made by one supplicating a person in a more powerful
position.
472 Poetry and song have a ritual function: the paian, a group song dedicated to Apollo, and
performed usually in thanksgiving or supplication, is depicted as pleasing the god as though he were
an audience member, much as a sacrifice does.
516 Thetis brings up the topic of honor that has marked the quarrel between her son and
Agamemnon, subtly implying that she has the status and power to cause similar strife if her wishes
are not satisfied.
541 The poet depicts a vividly real divine family by such touches, giving the impression of longstanding personal relations among the gods.
565 Although gods cannot die, the threat of violent treatment keeps them under control. In structure
and language, the scene mirrors Agamemnon’s threats against Chryses at the opening of this book. In
addition, the mediation attempted by Hephaistos recalls Nestor’s advice during the quarrel between

Agamemnon and Achilleus (1.248–84). This squabble at a divine feast makes a deliberate ironic
contrast with the mortal struggles earlier, as does the calm ending of the episode.
586 Several times characters in the Iliad encourage others by reference to previous events that have a
mythical status (e.g., 5.381–404; 9.524–99; 24.602–20). Hephaistos makes his own experiences into
this kind of paradigmatic myth. Lemnos, a volcanic island in the northeastern Aegean not far from
Troy, was associated with fire and the forges of the smith-god (although it has never possessed an
active volcano, unlike other spots where Hephaistos was worshiped). The Sintians are an otherwise
unattested people whose name derives from the verb “to harm.” Hephaistos tells a quite different
story at 18.395–405, where it is Hera herself who threw him out of Olympos, ashamed of his
lameness. Thetis at that time rescued and for nine years sheltered him—perhaps a cause for Hera’s
apparent antagonism toward the nymph now.
BOOK TWO

6

“Evil” Dream. The adjective literally means “causing destruction,” related to a verb just used

(“destroy”) in lines above. Like Sleep and Death, Dream is a half-personified abstraction, and along
with them is one of the many children of Night, including Nemesis, Old Age, Strife, Deception, and
the Fates, according to Hesiod’s Theogony (211–25).
33

Dream relates the message of Zeus verbatim, but cannot resist adding his own touch, telling

Agamemnon not to forget what he has just heard. The poet elsewhere plays with such minor
variations on repeated speeches (as in Odysseus’ speech to Achilleus in book 9).
38

Foreshadowing by the poet about facts someone in the story does not yet know is frequently

accompanied by the remark that the character is a “fool” (nêpios).
48

Dawn (Êôs) is a goddess living at the edge of the world (where myths relate that she keeps her

mortal lover Tithonos). The rare and beautiful expression “message of light” draws a contrast with
the loud noise of the camp as heralds summon the troops.
53

The council of elders always meets to discuss important matters before they are announced to

the general assembly of fighting men, a system that is echoed in the later Athenian democratic

institutions of small executive council (boulê—the same word used here) and legislative assembly
(ekklêsia).
70

Agamemnon produces his own twist on the message of Dream, omitting the final advice to not

forget (clearly he has not). He also adds to the command to arm the troops a quite odd verbal
“testing,” which he claims is “customary” (themis), in which he will suggest the opposite of what he
really wants: that everyone take ship for home. As if already unsure whether this test will backfire (as
it eventually does) Agamemnon advises his fellow commanders to stand at the ready with
encouraging words.
80

Nestor’s seconding of the advice is ironic, since Dream took none other than his form (as

Agamemnon’s most trusted advisor)—something Agamemnon has explicitly revealed (58). The old
warrior takes the opportunity to flatter Agamemnon as “best of the Achaians” while tacitly affirming
his own great worth.
86

A vivid, cinematic depiction of mass movement and loud noise. The complex simile echoes

sound and scenery, while also bearing thematic overtones: the Greeks first resemble swarming bees
(hence dangerous, but numerous, organized, and acting communally).
101 Although the other kings have just been described as all “sceptered,” the poet singles out the
ancestral scepter of the leader Agamemnon for genealogical digression that increases his stature and
ties him to divinity (since the gods made it). The history of the scepter hints at a darker side through
the mention of Agamemnon’s family. His father Atreus won the kingship of Mykenai after a dispute
with his brother Thyestes; after learning that Thyestes had seduced his wife, Atreus killed, cooked,
and served to Thyestes his own children. The son of Thyestes, Aigisthos, will kill Agamemnon (with
the aid of Agamemnon’s wife Klytaimestra) on his arrival home. Although none of this sad history is
narrated, an audience aware of the myths might think the scepter’s description ironic. Since
Agamemnon can lean on the implement (109), it must be long, like a staff or shepherd’s crook:
appropriately Atreus has just been named with the formula “shepherd of the people” (105), and
Thyestes is called “of the rich flocks” (106).
111 In his speech pretending to give up, Agamemnon does not hesitate to accuse the chief god of
deception and of willing his destruction (atê).
122 Agamemnon’s excuse is that the Greeks could easily outnumber the inhabitants of the citadel of
Troy, but cannot make headway against the many allies who have been summoned. The claim (albeit

used only in a false speech) protects the commander against complaints that the Greeks badly
overestimated their troop strength.
155 The technique of relating what would have happened if a more immediate cause had not
intervened is often used to heighten dramatic effect, and also lets an audience imagine counterplots.
The intervention of Hera and Athene, based on their favoring the Greek side, goes back to their
resentment at being rejected in the judgment of Paris, although it is put in the language of fairness
and the efforts of the Achaians.
169 As the Odyssey demonstrates, this hero is Athene’s favorite among mortals. While he is “the
equal of Zeus” in cunning intelligence (mêtis), she is the daughter of the goddess who embodies this
trait. Zeus swallowed Mêtis, one of his consorts, out of fear that a son greater than himself would
come from her; Athene subsequently emerged from his head.
197 Honor from Zeus. Odysseus defends the authority of Agamemnon using the same terms that
Nestor had used at 1.278–79 and Agamemnon himself used at 1.175.
198 One of few passages where the presence of nonaristocrats in the ranks at Troy is acknowledged.
The rhetorical abuse uttered by Odysseus makes them sound useless; his support of “one king” draws
attention to his own continuing role in propping up the authority of Agamemnon, while his
employment of the scepter to beat objectors ironically contrasts with his exalted claims for the
scepter-bearing king.
212 Thersites, with his store of abusive words, seems to be a forerunner of the satirist. Mocking
poetry, called iambos, is attested as early as the seventh century in Greece. His ugliness parallels the
quality of his discourse. That his usual targets were the best fighter and best planner in the army, the
protagonists respectively of the Iliad and the Odyssey, suggests an old tradition of antiheroic rhetoric
shadowing aristocratic epic traditions. Thersites repeats and amplifies the complaints of Achilleus in
book 1 concerning Agamemnon’s rapacity and injustice. The audience may know the story of
Thersites’ eventual death (narrated in the Aithiopis, an archaic continuation of the Iliad narrative): he
will be slain by Achilleus for mocking him about his alleged love for the Amazon woman and Trojan
ally Penthesileia.
271 Recording the reaction by anonymous members of the crowd creates a sense of immediacy and
closeness to the action, as well as producing an apparent majority opinion. That Odysseus’ threats
and assault please so many among the fighters deepens the time dimension, helping the audience
imagine the previous duration of Thersites’ annoying behavior.

286 Odysseus’ rhetorical technique is to induce guilt in the Greeks by blaming them for not keeping
their own promises (rather than by doubting Zeus). After showing his sympathy for the sufferings of
his audience (292), he vividly evokes the portent interpreted by Kalchas and rouses the troops with
his conclusion that the prophesied time has come.
349 Nestor’s complementary advice centers on an intellectual aspect of the struggle, as if the whole
war is an experiment: only by staying will the Greeks learn about Zeus’ trustworthiness or their own
capacities (367). His counsel regarding the order of battle seems more suited to the fighters of an
established city-state: Athenian life was organized along lines of clan (phrêtrai: literally
“brotherhood”) and tribe (phula). The old warrior’s commonsensical words about organization
chillingly mark his encouragement as well (355) that the victorious army commit mass rape.
405 The list of seven counselors is a good guide to those who will be prominent in the coming battle.
The chief commander’s role as chief sacrificer and provider of meat and wine undergirds his power,
especially as it must involve awarding portions according to his view of his warriors’ prowess.
445 The grandeur of the coming battle is highlighted by Athene’s magical intervention, a chain of six
similes, and a fresh, extended invocation to the Muses. The aegis of Athene is a shield-like goatskin
that in the hands of Zeus or the goddess can stun and terrify enemies (although here it seems to
inspire). The similes stress the ways in which the clash resembles powerful aspects of nature: forest
fire (the armor’s gleam); migrating birds, insects, and plant life (multitudes of fighters); herds of
goats (separate army divisions of men); and an ox (Agamemnon). The Muses are asked to provided
detailed information about the chief men and the strength to recite it. The subsequent Catalogue of
Ships must have been a tour de force in recitation. The contrast between hearing (a secondary form of
knowing) and autopsy (available occasionally to humans but always to the Muses, as they are eternal)
persists in later Greek literature, especially the historical writings of Herodotus and Thucydides.
494 Debates still surround the origins, accuracy, date, and poetics of the so-called Catalogue of
Ships. A few manuscripts and at least one papyrus copy of the Iliad omit this section altogether, but
the majority transmit it. Twenty-nine Greek contingents, totaling 1,186 ships (and carrying an
estimated 100,000 troops) are listed, with the description spiraling outward from Boeotia in central
Greece, in a clockwise direction around the mainland, out to the islands of Crete and Rhodes, then
back to northern Greece. The style resembles that of the poetry attributed to Hesiod, especially the
(now fragmentary) Catalogue of Women, and parts of the Works and Days and Theogony, but this
need not mean that this long passage was composed by someone outside the Homeric tradition: it is
simply a different sub-genre of poetry. Historians and archaeologists recognize that some of the

information must date back to Mykenaian times—perhaps even to accurate memories of an actual
Trojan expedition in the twelfth century. Eutresis, for example, seems to have been abandoned after
the end of the Bronze Age and not resettled until the sixth century BC. Appropriately, the Ionian
Greek cities are omitted, as these were known to be post–Trojan War foundations. (The Cycladic
Islands, however, even though they do contain Mykenaian remains, are also missing.) At the same
time, the alignments of ethnicities, cities, and political connections seem mainly to reflect later Iron
Age conditions. Even if it may not equal a modern census-taker’s work, the Catalogue nevertheless
offers a significant mapping of on-the-ground social relations of archaic Greece.
NB: In the following notes, Only those names of persons and places will be mentioned for

which there is information of interest beyond simple identification of locale; for the rest, the
glossary on page 573 and the maps on pages 70 and 71 should be consulted. For further details
see T. W. Allen, The Homeric Catalogue of Ships (Oxford, 1921); R. Hope Simpson and J. F.
Lazenby, The Catalogue of the Ships in Homer’s Iliad (Oxford, 1970); and (in German) E.
Visser, Homers Katalog der Schiffe (Stuttgart, 1997).
494 Boiotian fighters, puzzlingly, do not play a major role in the Iliad (even though evidence now
suggests it was a powerful region in Mykenaian times). But the Catalogue may take this starting
point because it includes Aulis, the gathering spot for the expedition and site of the sacrifice of
Iphigeneia, daughter of Agamemnon, to appease Artemis and obtain favoring winds.
505 “Lower Thebes” is all that remained after the sack of the upper city, so this detail fits the myth of
a pre–Trojan War attack carried out by Diomedes and other sons of the Seven against Thebes.
513 The genealogical detail is in the style of the Hesiodic Catalogue of Women, which arranges large
segments of tradition according to which mythical women bore what off spring. A smaller selection
in this style occurs in Odysseus’ account of women he met in the underworld (Odyssey, book 11).
530 This is the only example in Homer in which “Hellenes” means all Greeks (as do the synonymous
Danaäns, Argives, and Achaians), rather than the inhabitants of a smaller region named Hellas,
corresponding to the area near Phthia (Achilleus’ territory: see 683–84 below). The term became the
Classical (and modern) designation for the Greeks.
536 The Abantes are distinguished from other Greeks, regularly “long-haired” in Homer, by having
their hair shaved in the front (to prevent being grabbed by enemies), while left long in back.

546 Erechtheus was born directly from the earth (and is thus “autochthonous”—as later Athenians,
like a number of Native American tribes, claimed to be), although Athene is his patron and in some
versions foster mother. His establishment in her temple reflects the representation of a hero cult, as
do the annual sacrifices—perhaps a reminiscence of something like the annual Panathenaic festival.
557 From an early period of Homeric criticism, this line has been suspected as an Athenian
interpolation (attributed either to Solon or Peisistratos in the sixth century BC) intended to make a
political claim for Salamis in the face of competition from Megara.
595 Thamyris comes from Thrace, like the mythical bard Orpheus, and like him, suffers for his art.
The Muses in other cases blind a singer but give the art of song in compensation (e.g., Od. 8.63
concerning Demodocus). By contrast, Thamyris is stripped of his ability because he challenged the
Muses (e.g., the story of Marsyas who challenged Apollo and was flayed). There may be professional
jealousy among epic singers beneath the otherwise gratuitous reference: Oichalia, from which
presumably Thamyris would be bringing the latest news, was associated with another strata of saga,
connected with Herakles, a hero who is otherwise continuously put in the shade in the Iliad.
670 The shower of wealth on Rhodes was literal: Zeus is reputed to have poured down gold like
snow on the island.
671 Nireus, from the insignificant island, is never heard of again in the Iliad. The mention of his
beauty, however, allows the poet to slip in a reminder of the otherwise absent Achilleus, to
foreground the theme of the relative distribution of gods’ gifts (beauty but not power), and to
continue to create the overarching sense that the entire world of Greeks and Trojans came to this war.
721 Philoktetes, abandoned on Lemnos because his pained groans and stinking wound disturbed
Greek rites, will be remembered after the death of Achilleus, when the Greeks obtain a prophecy that
the bow of Herakles—in the possession of Philoktetes—is needed to take Troy. Sophocles’
Philoktetes dramatizes the machinations by which Odysseus tries to get it.
731 Asklepios, son of Apollo, was a hero and healer; Trikke had an early healing cult (although the
later Epidauros complex, with its theater and hospital, became more famous).
743 The “hairy beast men” are Centaurs, humans with the lower bodies of horses, who dwelled in the
woods of Mount Pelion. Cheiron, the wisest of them, was tutor to many heroes, including Achilleus,
but his brethren were lawless and uncontrolled, especially when exposed to wine. The battle of the
Lapiths with the Centaurs is alluded to at 1.262–68.

751 Titaressos contains waters of the Styx, the underworld river by which oaths are taken. Two other
rivers associated with the underworld are also connected, above ground, with the Pindos mountain
region of northwestern Greece (Akheron and Kokutos).
793 The barrow of Aisyetes is one of several tombs mentioned as being on the Trojan plain (e.g.,
Myrina at 2.814 and Ilos at 10.415). The topography is accurate, as the plain is studded even today
with ancient mounds.
867 The “outland” (literally “barbarous sounding”) speech of the Karians seems to be an archaizing
touch, as Greek-speakers inhabited the place from Mykenaian times onward. But there is evidence
Karian did survive alongside the newcomers’ tongue even through the Classical period. Nastes, “like
a girl,” is a grace note to the Catalogue of Trojan Allies, an elegiac touch that contrasts the pomp and
beauty of war with its darker realities of death. He is never mentioned again.
BOOK THREE

2

The Trojans often are associated with noise or confused languages (e.g., 2.810), while the

Greeks move in silence (4.429). A war between cranes and pygmies may stem from an Egyptian
folktale in oral tradition. Greeks of the Classical period knew of pygmies in Africa; the earliest
depiction of a conflict with cranes is on the François vase in Florence, from 570 BC by the blackfigure artist Kleitias.
15

The initial picture of Paris (also called Alexandros) is not flattering. His unusual leopard skin

may mark him as overly concerned about appearances. Nor does the pairing of similes (Menelaos as
a hungry lion, Paris as a scared hiker) present him favorably.
54

Hektor’s torrent of abuse includes reference to the combination of erotic and musical attractions

his brother has. That he does not exaggerate will be established at 394 and 442. Paris himself (65)
confirms the characterization but shifts responsibility to the gods.
70

The terms of the agreement make clear that it was not simply the abduction (or elopement) of

Helen, but also the taking of possessions from the palace of Menelaos that provided the rationale for
war.

103 The black lamb is for Earth, the white for Sun, in accordance with Greek ideas of offerings
appropriate for chthonic (earthbound) versus Olympian deities. Zeus fits as the expected additional
recipient, since he was overseer of offenses related to hospitality (such as the behavior of Paris).
125 Helen’s web is analogous to the poem itself as a record of the struggle at Troy. She is thus
imagined as having some agency in representing her own story (and one would like to have seen the
result). The audience may be reminded of the weaving of Penelope, a very different heroine, also a
cause of contention.
144 Aithre was the mother of the Athenian hero Theseus, who does not figure in the Trojan War epic.
(In other versions, his son recovers her at the end of the conflict.) Theseus helped his friend
Peirithoös abduct Helen as a child, and Helen’s brothers in return captured Aithre, according to some
myths. The line has been seen as an Athenian interpolation (as has Nestor’s earlier mention of
Theseus: 1.265).
156 Helen, for all her beauty, is never physically described in the poem, except for these side
comments. As her appearance and presence can only be traced to the action of the divine, the old men
of Troy (and Priam) cannot hold her responsible.
173 Helen’s tone is most often regretful and she has a habit of reviling herself (180; 6.344). Her
description of Agamemnon, meanwhile, seems at odds with what the audience has sensed of his
leadership qualities in book 1.
189 The Amazons, women warriors of the east, were in an unspecified past enemies of Troy and its
allies (6.186). Yet the Cyclic epic sequel to the Iliad, the Aithiopis, opens with their arrival at Troy as
reinforcements.
205 A fascinating contrast of heroes based on their rhetorical abilities. Menelaos, from Sparta, is
laconic (the word derives from the proverbially terse speech of Laconia, the surrounding region).
Odysseus typically disguises his real character, acting dumb but speaking with almost overwhelming
fluency. The mission to which Antenor refers nevertheless failed, with the embassy barely escaping
(11.140).
236 Helen cannot see her brothers Kastor and Polydeukes (twins known in Greek as Dioscuri, in
Latin as Gemini) because they had been slain in a skirmish with rivals in Sparta. In most versions
Polydeukes, who was the immortal brother, shares his deathlessness with Kastor, so that each can be
alive part of the year.

287 Two familiar legal notions are already at work: precedent and punitive damages. The idea of a
standard that will be set for all time parallels the very notion of heroic excellence as establishing a
benchmark for future endeavors.
332 Paris is an archer, usually operating at a distance from the front line, and so does not possess his
own corselet, designed to protect the wearer in close combat. His brother Lykaon will meet his death
at the hands of Achilleus (21.35).
374 Menelaos seems about to prove that Zeus is in fact with him (despite his failure to wound with
spear or sword), but the action of Paris’ patron goddess foils him—one of the complications within
polytheism richly explored throughout the poem.
396 The trickiness of Aphrodite is a continuing theme in Greek literature. Her disguise here seems
almost intentionally incomplete, as a provocation to Helen who must recognize her power and submit
to it (despite her initial feisty revolt: 399).
428 Helen’s regret and nostalgia for her former life has been hinted at (139) and now breaks into
sarcastic rejection of her current spouse. Paris’ insouciant response (that next time he might win)
hardly seems enough to defuse Helen’s scorn, but once more the power of Aphrodite, transmitted via
Paris, subdues her.
BOOK FOUR

1

The gods in assembly, like the audience in a theater, gaze at the struggle around Troy while

drinking nectar; Zeus uses the contrasting situations to needle his wife and daughter about being
distanced from the battle, while their nemesis Aphrodite has intervened on the spot to help Paris.
19

Both Helen and Hera (8) are called “Argive.” Hera had an important shrine (the Heraion) near

the city of Argos, but Helen’s association with the area stems from marriage to Menelaos, whose
origin was in the ancient fortress city of Mykenai in the area near Argos (the “Argolid”). In the
Odyssey, the couple resides in Helen’s hometown, Sparta (along with Argos and Mykenai, one of
Hera’s three favored cities: 52). Local lore from antiquity and archaeological finds make it clear that
Helen was worshiped as a goddess in the region around her birthplace. The application of the epithet

“Argive” makes it more natural to view Helen’s marriage as somewhat parallel to Hera’s. The end of
book 3 has shown her criticizing Paris in a manner not unlike that of Zeus’ wife.
27

That the gods sweat and toil seems odd, but to make them more real the Iliad regularly presents

divinities as undergoing nearly mortal suffering; they simply do not expire. Of Hera’s personal efforts
to gather armies against Troy, we know nothing further.
35

The desire to eat an enemy is expressed (under pressure of great grief) by Achilleus, before

killing Hektor (22.347), and by Hekabē, mother of the dead hero (24.213). In similes, lions (e.g.,
5.782) and wolves (16.156) devour prey raw. The bargain made here between gods is first in a series
of such compromises in the poem, all of them fatal to mortals.
48

Zeus favors Troy for reasons of ritual correctness: he has never lacked offerings of meat and

wine from the inhabitants. His concern for such perquisites is not unlike Agamemnon’s; he uses the
word geras (49: “prize; portion of honor”) to describe sacrifices, the term with which the Greek
commander characterized his war bride Chryseis (1.118, 120, etc.).
52

Hera’s major mainland shrine the Heraion was halfway between Argos and Mykenai, both of

which are important Bronze Age sites. In Sparta she had a hilltop temple (Pausanias 3.13.8).
75

The image, a blend of comet and meteor, provides a fine tracking shot from Olympos to the

scene of the battle. Its ambiguous significance (war or peace?) gives the keynote for the next several
books, as the audience awaits the turn of battle promised by Zeus.
91

The Aisepos flows from the foothills of Mount Ida (southeast of Troy) northward to the

Propontis. (Map 1, p. 70.)
95

Pandaros’ rewards typify the motivations for many Iliadic warriors: the thanks (kharis) of a

community, which could lead to reciprocal favors in the future; glory (kudos); and immediate
material payoff (dôra). In return for a successful shot, he must pledge an eventual sacrifice of one
hundred lambs to Apollo.
130 An unusual sequence of slow-motion, close-up narrative, framed by two similes related to
women (a mother swatting a fly; a woman crafting a horse’s cheek piece), and with such attention to
materials, color, and design that the actual wounding almost resembles an artwork. The combination
of corselet, war belt, and skin guard (possibly a metallic piece to protect the lower abdomen) is

unusual, and may owe more to poetic elaboration (or even misunderstanding) than actual defense
wear.
163 Agamemnon, while not losing confidence that Troy is doomed, fears nevertheless that the death
of Menelaos would discourage the troops and lead to his own humiliating return empty-handed.
Imagining what someone might say in the future is a characteristic of Hektor’s rhetoric, most often
(see, e.g., 7.87–91).
200 Machaon (“Battler”) is one of two doctors in the field, his brother Podaleirios being the other;
both are sons of the healing hero Asklepios (2.731), a son of Apollo by Coronis.
241 The ensuing scene gives a good sense of the role of rhetoric in battle, a continuing feature of
later Greek historical narratives (e.g., Xenophon’s Anabasis). A combination of pep talk, flattery, and
ritual insult, this series of short speeches includes regular reference to the feasts provided by the
commander (260, 345), with hints that repayment is due from his fighters.
301 Nestor’s advice to “drivers of horses” is for chariot drivers, as fighting from horseback is
unknown in Homer. Here and elsewhere the use of chariots in Bronze Age battle appears to be only
vaguely understood by the Iron Age poet, who most often represents fighters as traveling in them to
the front lines, then stepping down to fight.
354 A pun underlies Odysseus’ mention of his son, Telemachos (“far-fighter”), since “champion” is
literally “near-fighter” (promakhos).
372 Tydeus was one of the Seven against Thebes, allies sworn to restore Polyneikes to the throne of
his late father Oedipus. The story of his valor is meant to inspire Diomedes, and so Agamemnon
tactfully omits reference to its seamier side: Tydeus lost Athene’s favor because, enraged, he ate the
brain of a decapitated enemy, Melanippos.
405 The son of Kapaneus is Sthenelos, who with Diomedes and five others (known collectively as
the Epigoni or “After-born”), razed Thebes to the ground a decade after their fathers had perished in
the first assault on the city.
437 The disciplined silence of the Greeks is contrasted several times with Trojan noise (e.g., 3.1–10),
which is here further related to the linguistic diversity of the Trojan side.

474 The flashback humanizes the victim, while the simile’s image of a poplar laid low alongside
water circles back to the circumstances of the birth and naming of Simoeisios, near the local river.
That the poplar’s wood is used to make a chariot wheel brings us forward into the world of battle.
507 Apollo, like a coach or spectator, keeps his distance while Athene actively enters the fray (515,
542) as had Ares (439). It is Apollo who mentions the equally distant Achilleus, the hero who is most
like the god in other respects as well.
536 In such images as this (enemies lying next to one another in the dust) the poem draws attention
to the common humanity and shared fate of the opposed sides.
BOOK FIVE

1

In this book, the first extended aristeia (“display of warrior’s excellence”) in the poem,

Diomedes, the “best of the Achaians” next to Achilleus, takes the field with Athene’s divine help.
Her wish to make him conspicuous is visible in his armor’s fiery blaze (like the dog-star Sirius). His
success, even against intervening gods, will give the Greek side temporary hopes of victory.
10

The Trojans and their allies are consistently depicted as worshiping the same gods as the Greeks

(see, e.g., 1.35–42, 6.297–310).
15

In the stylized convention of the Iliad, the first warrior to strike generally loses in any single-

combat encounter. Complicating the action here is the recurrent motif of two warriors against one.
Another frequent motif, the battle over a corpse, is repeated in vastly expanded form in the fight to
retrieve the body of Patroklos (book 17).
23

The god to whom Idaios’ father is devoted (10) intervenes at the crucial moment, with the

emotional motivation foregrounded (Hephaistos did not want his priest to suffer distress). A related
motif is divine rescue of favorites: 3.380, 20.325, etc. (Contrast5.53: Artemis fails to save her
protégée.)
31

Athene mentions the potential destructive anger of Zeus (mênis) in her proposal that she and the

war god defer to him and withdraw. Sensible as this is in light of Zeus’ later threats to punish any

intervention by the gods (8.5–27), it also at this point conveniently allows Diomedes, one of Athene’s
favorites, to rage in battle, unchecked by opposing divinities.
37

The highly cinematic scan beginning here pinpoints the leading Greek heroes, who will then in

turn be contrasted with the most successful fighter, Diomedes. As in similar extended catalogues of
slayings, the poet never exactly repeats details. The basic descriptive pattern (strike; location of
wounded part; fall of victim) is expanded and varied with further elements (armor stripped; horses
taken). Emotional peaks are crafted through brief “obituaries” (glimpses into the previous life or
motives of the deceased), which make the audience sympathize even with the enemies of the Greeks.
95

Pandaros the son of Lykaon appears to make his bowshot into a test of Apollo’s support for him,

but does not remark on the religious import when he fails to subdue Diomedes. His opponent gets
immediate reassurance, on the other hand, from his patroness Athene that she had indeed supported
Tydeus his father (and will also help him). This is confirmed when she collaborates in his killing of
Pandaros (290).
144 The “shepherd of the people,” a common phrase, here picks up on the immediately preceding
image (Diomedes as a lion grazed by a shepherd’s throw) and recalls earlier comparisons of Trojans
to sheep (e.g., 4.433).
149 The rapid execution of the sons (two apiece) of Eurydamas, Phainops, and Priam highlights the
theme of severed father-son ties that is crucial to Diomedes’ biography and will epitomize the
isolation of Achilleus (esp. books 18 and 24).
171 Aineias appeals, in his mild rebuke, solely to the pride of Pandaros (contrast Athene’s multiple
motivations in 4.93) and recommends prayer to Zeus (not Apollo).
197 The theme of father-son relations once again surfaces, as Pandaros regrets his failure to heed
paternal advice about taking his chariot to Troy. Along with touching detail (his concern about horse
fodder), Pandaros’ story contains motifs common to “obituary” descriptions (e.g., 205, about the
ultimate uselessness of weapons).
260 Ganymede, on account of his surpassing beauty, was taken by the gods to serve on Olympos as
Zeus’ wine-pourer (as Aineias explains in 20.234). The divine horses given as compensation to the
boy’s father Tros were passed down to Tros’ grandson Laomedon. Anchises, the father of Aineias,
was the son of Laomedon’s cousin.

303 Strength beyond that of current men is one of the few ways in which the poem marks its heroes
as being of a different generation.
313 The audience anticipates the clash, as Athene has allowed Diomedes (130) to wound this
goddess alone of immortals. Aphrodite’s care for her son Aineias recalls the simile of maternal care
in 4.130 (Athene protecting Menelaos).
339 The gods can be wounded, but they do not bleed like humans. Spilling blood implies death; gods
are immortal; therefore they must have not blood, but another substance, ikhôr, in their veins. But
blood is generated by human food and drink; the gods therefore do not eat food, but survive on nectar
and ambrosia (literally “the immortal”). This idea avoids conflict with the notion that they appreciate
sacrificial smoke and libations, as we do not hear of them directly consuming such nourishment.
349 Diomedes’ remark probably alludes to Helen’s ongoing subordination to the goddess: see 3.413.
370 Nowhere else in epic is Dione attested as mother of Aphrodite, whose origin from the genitals of
Ouranos is vividly described in Hesiod’s Theogony (188–206). The name is a feminine form of
“Zeus”; the goddess was associated with him in the oracle cult of Dodona in northwestern Greece.
385 There is a slightly comic tinge to Dione’s catalogue, since immortals will only be discomforted,
not die. The gigantic sons of Aloeus are more famous for their attempt to pile Mount Pelion onto
Mount Ossa to reach the sky and dislodge the gods. The son of Amphitryon is Herakles; the two
woundings attributed to him are otherwise unattested. Pylos (397) could refer to the home of Nestor
(which Herakles attacked: see 11.689), for which Hades may have been acting as protector. Related
to pylê, “gate,” the city seems to have been known as an entrance to the underworld.
401 Paiëon is in book 5 (and at Od. 4.232) a separate, minor divinity of healing. (The name is old,
attested as pajawone on Linear B tablets from Knossos.) The name in Classical Greek becomes a title
for Apollo; already in epic (1.473, e.g.) as a common noun, it denotes a song of thanksgiving (for
healing?) dedicated to Apollo—the “paean.”
438 Charging “like more than man” (literally “equal to a divinity,” daimoni isos) signals either retreat
or death for the mortal fighter. Patroklos is described thus once when yielding to Apollo (16.705) and
again when he persists and is killed (16.786).
472 Tension between Hektor and the allies of the Trojans is a recurrent theme, and the Lykians
(Sarpedon and Glaukos) the most frequent voices of rebuke (e.g., 16.536, 17.140), as having traveled

farthest to aid Priam and his people. Sarpedon’s observation that he risks no losses of his own at Troy
(480–85) echoes Achilleus’ dissenting words to Agamemnon (1.152–57).
522 The similes of cloud and wind (499) not only slow the narration of immediate action but also
naturalize it, making war into an expected, necessary phenomenon like winnowing or weather.
604 Athene’s gift of extra sight enables Diomedes to discern the presence of the god of war.
633 The scene is a reminder that both sides feature as champions descended from Zeus. The Lykian
Sarpedon’s maternal line goes back to the Greek trickster Sisyphos of Argos (see 6.154). Herakles
sacked Troy after Laomedon reneged on a promised reward for defeating the sea monster that had
menaced his daughter Hesione. The tale is more fully sketched at 20.145–48 and 21.451.
697 Of the four scenes of loss of consciousness in the Iliad (5.310; 14.438; 22.466), only here does
wind revive a person. The north wind, Boreas, is a divinity with human form (23.195), whose lifegiving capacity appears also in his generating divine horses (20.223).
785 The only Homeric mention of this loud character, whose name has become an English adjective
(stentorian).
800 Athene’s rebuke refers to the episode, from the Seven against Thebes saga, narrated in more
detail by Agamemnon (4.385) in the course of a similar speech. Diomedes has not, in fact, held back
beyond the limits set by Athene, who now changes the rules of engagement to let him attack Ares,
with her help.
838 As heroes are stronger than men of the current day, so gods are weightier than heroes.
872 Ares bases his appeal to Zeus on a presumed sense of outrage on the part of the chief god, as had
Hera and Athene at 757; Zeus’ response to their earlier appeal is precisely what led to Ares’
wounding. The rather adolescent tone, in a complaint about family favoritism, transposes into a
comic key the theme of fathers and sons so prominent throughout this book.
BOOK SIX

6

Fighting throughout the poem presents an alternation of mass formations—the “battalion”

(phalanx)—and looser, individual engagements against the foe. This may not be far from the reality
of archaic warfare. Around 700–650 BC, Greek states began employing the fast-moving collision
force of contingents of hoplites (heavily armed men) who maintained close formation. This tactic left
little room or time for the display of heroic individualism. It may have been known to the poet of the
Iliad, but is never unambiguously depicted in the poem.
16 The motif of friends or equipment being powerless to save one in battle punctuates the poem: cf.
2.873, 15.530.
21

Naiads are one of several nymph varieties, oreads (of mountains) and dryads (of trees) being the

other main groups, along with sea nymphs called Okeanids or Nereids (daughters of Nereus, like
Thetis). The naiad dwells in a lake, spring, or river. The flashback to a bucolic scene, as occurs in
similes as well, makes for a jarring contrast with the ongoing battle.
45

Supplication scenes include the grasping of the would-be protector’s knees (sometimes chin,

too); mention of ransom; and, on occasion, biographical details that the suppliant imagines might
evoke pity: see 11.131, and the most developed scene (Lykaon), 21.74. The contrasted reactions of
the two brothers are a deft touch of characterization.
68

Nestor makes explicit the mixed motivations among the fighters throughout the battle, as the

common goal of subduing the Trojans competes with individual desires for plundered armor.
75

Helenos later overhears the wishes of the gods (7.44), but here we do not learn his source for the

advice to placate Athene in her shrine. The offering of a robe resembles the presentation to Athene
during the Panathenaic festival in Athens (memorably depicted on the frieze of the Parthenon). The
focus on Diomedes as most dangerous of the Greek threats keeps the audience in mind of his raging
attacks in the preceding book.
117 From the detail, we learn that Hektor carries an archaic Mykenaian-era full-body shield; other
warriors have a smaller round shield of more recent type.
123 Diomedes’ tough talk is intended to diminish his opponent, and therefore we can read his
questioning (whether Glaukos has divine status) as highly ironic, rather than as contradicting his
special temporary capacity to detect gods. The tale of Lykourgos is one of many such stories about
misdirected rejections of Dionysos, the most famous of which underlies Euripides’ Bacchae. In the

current analogy, Diomedes professes fear of resembling Lykourgos, but his focus on Dionysos’ flight
seems like a taunt directed toward Glaukos.
146 The line offers the oldest surviving quotation from Homer, in a poem by Simonides who
flourished circa 500 BC and attributes it to “the man of Chios.” The image of leaves is used to make a
different point by Apollo (21.464), that ephemeral humans should not disturb divine harmony.
153 Sisyphos tricked Death once, and another time Hades, in order to return to his life, but was
finally tasked with constantly rolling an eternally returning boulder up a hill in the underworld.
158 The story of Bellerophontes combines the motifs of a young hero driven from his kingdom
(Jason, Perseus) with the “Potiphar’s wife” plot (Genesis 39:1–20; cf. the ancient Egyptian Tale of
Two Brothers, from the thirteenth century BC).
168 The “murderous symbols” may be a vague recollection of an early form of writing (perhaps
Linear B or a script of Asia Minor) by a poet whose audience does not know letters, or an archaizing
touch, for a literate public, focalizing the imagined viewpoint of the Bronze Age hero. Folding
writing tablets dating to the fourteenth century BC were recovered in the 1980s from the Uluburun
shipwreck off the coast of Turkey, close to what was ancient Lykia.
179 The Chimaira (“she-goat”) is one of the few monsters mentioned by Homer, a type more at home
in the poetry of Hesiod, whose Theogony (325) refers also to the role of Pegasos, the famous winged
horse of Bellerophontes, in the story of his conquest of the beast. The Iliad version omits Pegasos
just as it avoids mention of the hero’s unwise attempt to fly to Olympos, only vaguely referring to his
unhappy end.
184 Herodotus (1.173) reports that the Solymoi, original inhabitants of Lykia, were driven out by
invaders from Crete. The Amazons, a famous race of women warriors, fought against the Trojans in
Priam’s youth (3.189) and will reappear later in the saga, when Penthesileia, daughter of Ares, leads
them to aid Troy (a story told in the Cyclic epic sequel to the Iliad, the Aithiopis).
216 The connection of Glaukos with a leading Greek clan is not what prompts the offer of friendship
from Diomedes. Instead, it is the (alleged) guest-friendship (xenia) of their grandfathers. A cynic
might read Diomedes’ whole tale as a devious ploy to wrest gold armor from his innocent opponent.
Most critics see the episode as a sincere, humane interlude amid mutual slaughter. Either way,
Diomedes has benefited from the iron-clad rules of exchange, which ignore asymmetry of gifts.

255 Hekabē is convincingly sketched as a doting mother, whose conjectures about Hektor’s motives
(that he was exhausted from the fighting, that he wanted to pray to Zeus) the audience already knows
are wrong. Hektor’s piety is embodied in the concern for ritual purity.
289 Sidon and Tyre were cities of Phoenicia. Herodotus (2.116) cites this passage with its mention of
a Near Eastern detour as evidence that the Cyclic epic Cypria (according to which Paris and Helen
reached Troy from mainland Greece in three days) could not have been composed by Homer.
321 A significant contrast is intended between weary, bloodstained Hektor, whose anxious wife
awaits, and his brother Paris ensconced in domestic comfort with his paramour. Lattimore has Hektor
and Paris argue whether “coldness” (326, 335) is the motive for Paris’ withdrawal. The Greek at both
places is kholos (anger, resentment), which has been seen as a narrative slip caused by the pressure of
the more central theme, Achilleus’ anger. A compromise interpretation could be that Paris nurses a
sort of passive aggression because his fellow Trojans are by now themselves angry enough to let him
be killed (3.454).
403 Possibly Hektor does not allow himself, for reasons of modesty or superstition, to apply the
praise name Astyanax (deriving from his own role as protector) to his son, preferring the neutral
Skamandrios (from the nearby river’s name). For a similar application of father’s status to son’s
name, compare Telemachos—the “far-fighter”—the son of Odysseus (who himself battles from afar,
either by being an Ithacan at Troy or by his skill as an archer, who usually shoots from behind the
front rank).
415 Ironically, this sack of Thebes led to the capture of Chryseis (1.369), whose return home has
indirectly triggered Achilleus’ angry withdrawal, which in turn will ultimately result in Hektor’s
death. Although one might expect Andromachē to press her husband to take vengeance for her
family’s extinction, she instead worries about preserving his life, as he is her last hope.
423 Tradition held that the Trojan wall was scalable in one vulnerable spot and would be breached by
off spring of Aiakos (grandfather of both Achilleus and Telamonian Aias), who had assisted Poseidon
and Apollo in building it (Pindar, Olympian, 8.30–45 [460 BC]). The fig tree (433; like the oak tree,
5.693) is one of several landscape features used to orient the action near Troy (see also 11.167,
22.145).
454 As often in the poem, Hektor easily articulates images and remarks set in the future. His fear for
his wife’s status as a Greek slave is exacerbated by the way he imagines it reflecting back on his own
heroic status. This psychologically apt speech shifts through many tones: professions of shame and

desire for glory, his affection for his wife even over his blood kin, his realization of Troy’s impending
doom. More than any words, the image of Hektor removing his helmet to calm his baby captures the
pathos of his imminent death while defending his family.
BOOK SEVEN

21

Pergamos is the highest point of Troy. The oak tree, marking a spot near the Skaian gates of the

city (6.237), is regularly associated with safety, while the fig tree gets mentioned at moments of
danger (see note to 6.423).
44

The most reliable mode of communicating divine will in the poem is through what is heard,

rather than through (often debatable) visual signs, perhaps a clue to the poem’s own origins in oral
tradition and the poet’s reliance on the word of the Muse. Having Helenos overhear the gods enables
the narrative to move more quickly, while varying the usual pattern of divine descent and
intervention. The seer adds his own encouraging improvement on the message, telling Hektor it is not
his time to die (52).
58

One of the few passages where gods take the actual form of birds (as opposed to moving like

birds: e.g., 5.778). Sleep at 14.290 similarly perches in a tree. The gods’ aesthetic pleasure in the
sight of the troops is carried over into the perspective of the ensuing simile (63), which presents an
aerial view of wind-stirred waters.
77

Hektor’s instructions and promise foreshadow the major crisis of the end of the poem, the

treatment of his corpse (an ongoing anxiety while he is alive: cf. 22.259 and 22.338).
Characteristically, he adds a vivid example of what people will say in the future (cf. 6.460) when
glorifying him as they view his foe’s tomb.
104 The second-person address to Menelaos (as later with Patroklos) adds pathos and draws the
audience to his point of view. His volunteering resembles a theatrical gesture, and is quickly
deflected by Agamemnon and Nestor, who use the occasion to shame the other Greeks into accepting
the challenge (124).
128 Nestor’s biography lends authority. His role as the most skilled speaker and keeper of heroic
genealogies resembles the poet’s. His narrative style differs, however, by continually looping

backward before circling around to the starting point: the mention of Ereuthalion’s armor prompts
recollection of Areïthoös and his nickname, then of Lykourgos, who stripped the armor and gave it
eventually to Ereuthalion. The war of Pylians against Arkadians is further recalled at 11.669. Though
the rivers cannot be located, Pheia appears to have been near modern Katakolo, a port on the Ionian
sea, not far west of Olympia in the territory of Elis.
220 The special connection of Aias with the tower shield is reflected even in the name of his son,
Eurysakes (“broad shield”). Its unusually thick construction with multiple layers makes suspenseful
any spear-cast against it, as the audience waits to hear how deep the weapon will go.
237 Hektor compares his knowledge of fighting to dance: the “measures” which he treads with his
shield are even reflected in the meter and phrasing of these lines. A war dance in armor (pyrrhikê),
well known and practiced in Classical times, surely had predecessors, to which these lines may
allude.
290 The end of the duel seems abrupt, with the heralds like umpires calling a game on account of
nightfall. But it has made the point that the men are equally matched and fulfills the prayer of the
Greeks (204) that, short of a win, Zeus grant the pair equal strength.
303 The gifts exchanged are linked in lore to the eventual deaths of each: Hektor’s corpse is bound
and dragged by the belt; Aias kills himself with the sword.
336 The mound is to be both tomb and defensive wall: if the latter function had been most important,
constructing the wall now would be anachronistic (although seeming anachronisms in the poem, such
as the elementary identification of warriors from the Trojan wall in book 3, are tolerated for drama’s
sake). If sepulchral commemoration is the goal, construction after this major slaughter makes more
sense.
348 Another abrupt surprise: the proposal by Antenor to give back Helen sets up the forceful
rejection by Paris, albeit with the concession that he is willing to return Menelaos’ treasures along
with punitive damages.
421 The moving scene of each army trying to recognize their dead, side by side, is given added
emotional impact by the complete silence. The basic human sameness of Greek and Trojan is
emphasized by the exact repetition of phrases to describe either side’s actions.

445 Nestor’s plan arouses the competitive instinct of the sea god. It is less the alleged impiety of
failing to perform foundation sacrifices that annoys Poseidon than it is the threat that the new wall
will outshine his and Apollo’s building. The objection (like the Antenor-Paris exchange) appears to
be a setup for Zeus’ further promise that the Greek construction will be short-lived (confirmed at
12.15–30, viewed from a time after Troy’s fall). The projection forward is a rarely used technique for
setting the tragic action at Troy sub specie aeternitatis, making all human concerns look minuscule.
467 Lemnos (where the Greeks had left behind the commander Philoktetes with his festering
snakebite: 2.725) lies fifty miles to the west of Troy. Jason visited it with his Argonauts, welcomed
by the Lemnian women (who had killed their errant husbands). Euneos (“good ship”) is his son by
Hypsipyle, the Lemnian queen. There may be implied contrasts between Jason’s expedition (in
search of an emblem of kingship, the golden fleece; taking back a dangerous woman, Medea) and the
current Trojan mission. A subtle touch of class distinction relevant to aristocratic gift-economy: the
Atreidai get their wine free, while the ordinary troops must barter for it (even trading slaves).
BOOK EIGHT

13

Tartaros is here distinct from Hades (both names can denote deities as well). Rather than a place

of punishments for mortals, it is the furthest a god can be from divine society and so forms a holding
place for Zeus’ enemies (cf. 479–81; and Hesiod, Theogony, 865). The gold cord scenario (19)
prompted much speculation by Neoplatonist philosophers who saw in it an allegorical expression of
the relation of godhead to the material world (see Lamberton, Homer the Theologian [Berkeley,
1986], 271–72).
39

Tritogeneia was obscure even in antiquity as an epithet for Athene. It may mean “Triton-born”

in relation to various bodies of water so named, although the goddess has nothing to do with Triton,
son of Poseidon; more likely it means “genuine daughter” (literally “third-born”).
48

Gargaron is the highest peak of Mount Ida, near Troy, and the site mentioned may be where

Hektor used to make sacrificial offerings to Zeus (22.171).
69

The scales of Zeus may seem to contradict his recent assertion of total power, since he seems to

hand over the fate of the armies to chance. But a balance is not a dice toss: it vividly makes concrete

the decision he had already reached in agreeing with Thetis to honor Achilleus. The only other time
Zeus employs it, Hektor’s doom tips down: 22.209.
108 These are the immortal horses which Aineias’ father got from the gift of the gods to Tros (5.265–
73).
161 The honors mentioned—privileged seating at banquets and so on—are further expanded in the
discussion of heroic rights between Glaukos and Sarpedon (at 12.310). The implicit contract (wine
and food in exchange for fighting) is the background for the nearly comic rhetoric of Hektor to his
horses (185) urging them to repay their upkeep.
200 Hektor’s confidence that defeating Nestor and Diomedes will immediately make the Greeks flee
prompt’s Hera’s appeal to Poseidon. Of the sea god’s many shrines, Helikē (203) was in territory
ruled by Agamemnon (2.575), while Aigai, featuring an undersea palace, may have been imagined as
near Lesbos (13.21).
223 The configuration of ships mirrors the character of the leaders: Odysseus, the master of
compromise, is midway between the powerful individualists with a taste for isolation, Aias and
Achilleus.
230 The stopover at Lemnos probably happened when Philoktetes was abandoned there (2.722).
245 Prayer and pity in response trump the apparent power of Fate (expressed by Zeus’ balance). The
sending of a fawn recalls various substitute-sacrifice stories (e.g., Artemis, in one version, accepting
a fawn in lieu of Agamemnon’s daughter Iphigeneia). Symbolically, Zeus accepts the animal instead
of the human slaughter, for the present.
271 The mother-child simile lends an unexpectedly tender coloration to the relations of fellow
fighters. For a similar usage, see 16.7.
306 The lyric poignancy is increased by the implied contrast: unlike the flower after rain, the warrior
will not lift his head.
348 Gorgons petrify opponents with their stare (most famously in the tale of Perseus and Medusa), so
depictions were commonly used on shields (e.g., Agamemnon’s at 11.36) or as devices to ward off
evil from temples.

360 Athene uses of Zeus the same verb (mainetai, “rage, be furious”) that Hera had used of Hektor’s
manic rush (355). As emerges now, Athene keeps track of the deeds for which she is owed thanks,
especially her protection of Herakles (hero of the earlier generation, to be contrasted with Achilleus).
There are hints of jealous competition between Athene and the sea nymph Thetis.
393 The Hours (Horai), which can also be translated “Seasons,” are (in Hesiod, Theogony, 901)
Eunomia (Good Order), Eirene (Peace), and Dikê (Justice), names more indicative of their function
as regulators of all sorts of rhythms, including (as here) the exits and entrances of the gods, which
folklore may have connected with the changes of weather.
399 Iris, divine messenger, is (unlike the other go-between, Hermes) associated with the rainbow,
whence she lends her name, in English, to the flower and the colored membrane of the eye.
421 Iris adds tags on her own insult to what she has been commanded to say. It is unclear whether the
goddesses intend to attack Zeus himself, or this is just the chief god’s anxiety. At any rate, Hera’s
judgment that saving humans is not worth causing divine conflict—a frequent theme—calms the
rebellion.
470 As Zeus has a role in making the future, this is more a promise than a prediction. Iapetos was the
father of Prometheus, the benefactor of mankind who challenged Zeus; Kronos was the violent father
whom Zeus overthrew. (Both stories are narrated in Hesiod’s Theogony and Works and Days.) Zeus
seems to dismiss the possibility that an indignant Hera might successfully recruit his old enemies for
her cause.
538 Hektor’s certainty of killing Diomedes sounds hubristic and short-sighted when contrasted with
what we have heard in Zeus’ foreshadowing of events. Some critics have misconstrued his words to
assert an equivalence with the gods; in fact, the “if only” wish is a rhetorical flourish highlighting the
commander’s confidence for the benefit of his troops.
555 The final simile comparing fires on the plain to stars shifts its focus to the all-revealing
moonlight in a moving panoramic view. The contrast between the shepherd’s joy and the tense
prebattle expectation adds a personal viewpoint to the regular theme (war versus peace) of such
comparisons.
BOOK NINE

14

The infrequent image of the dark-running water draws attention to another crisis point, when

Patroklos seeks to enter the fray (16.3), a significant repetition if, as has been suggested, the poem
was performed over the course of three days with books 9 and 16 each starting a new day’s recitation.
30

Whereas Agamemnon’s speech of despair in book 2 was staged (and backfired) his apparently

sincere speech now is counteracted by the words of Diomedes, whose exploits are shown to have
gained him confidence in speaking out as an equal. Ironically Diomedes treats the commander as
dispensable, just as Agamemnon has treated Achilleus. Nestor’s suggestion for a feast is intended to
right the imbalance and restore Agamemnon’s status as chief dispenser of rewards.
120 “Gifts in abundance” translates a more technical phrase (apereisi’ apoina: “unbounded
compensation”) that is appropriate for ransom (cf. the same phrase in 1.13), but not to describe what
should be punitive damages demanded by the aggrieved party and recognizing guilt on the part of the
giver. (For the latter, poinê “expiation” is the proper term.) The crucial difference in attitude can
explain Achilleus’ refusal. See D. Wilson, Ransom, Revenge, and Heroic Identity in the Iliad
(Cambridge, 2002).
149 Another indication of the surpassing wealth and power of Agamemnon is that his territories
extend to Pylos. The seven towns mentioned differ from the nine listed as ruled by Nestor in the
Catalogue of Ships (2.591–602), and may reflect a real Mykenaian-era political division between
“near” and “far” Pylian territories.
182 The translation “these two” accurately reflects the Greek use of an archaic “dual” number
(neither singular nor plural, used to denote pairs), here and five other times in this scene. But the
embassy is either five (if one counts the two heralds) or three (Aias, Odysseus, Phoinix). The poet
may be repurposing a more traditional scene involving a pair (cf. the heralds’ dispatch at 1.320).
Homerists have not yet proposed an entirely convincing solution.
186 The violent warrior is hinted at in the brief description of the lyre’s origins (in the sack of the city
that also yielded Agamemnon’s war bride Chryseis: 1.369), while the scene that meets the embassy is
one of harmony and companionship, perhaps a musical evening in which the warriors take turns
singing heroic epics (about themselves?).
223 Odysseus interposes himself, although Aias had signaled to Phoinix, perhaps because he believes
his skill is greater than the older man’s; the resulting order of speeches nicely juxtaposes the clever

compromiser and the defender of the extreme heroic ideal. A significant quarrel between Achilleus
and Odysseus, at a sacrifice, is alluded to in Od. 8.75; throughout the Iliad one detects tension
between the men.
252 Having tried appeals to comradeship and to self-interest, Odysseus finally adds a quotation, said
to be from Achilleus’ father, designed to shame the hero into giving up his anger.
300 Instead of repeating Agamemnon’s words at this point (cf. 158–61), Odysseus diplomatically
substitutes a plea that Achilleus have compassion for his companions, despite his ongoing hatred for
Agamemnon. Achilleus, in turn, may be describing his preference for straight talk (312) by
mentioning his detestation of the man who hides realities; he could also be indirectly blaming
Odysseus himself, as if his concealment of Agamemnon’s exact words had been obvious.
328 Achilleus alludes to the attacks he carried out in the area around Troy over the past nine years,
such as the sack of Thebes.
381 Orchomenos reached its peak of wealth in the thirteenth century BC. Unless this is a very ancient
reminiscence, Thebes of Egypt (modern Luxor) could not be so described until its revival in fortunes
after 715 BC (and before its destruction by the Assyrians in 663 BC). Thus some scholars believe the
line offers a clue to the dating of the Iliad.
405 Apollo’s shrine at Delphi (“Pytho”) contained vast wealth from dedications by Greeks and
foreigners, and grew rapidly from the eighth century BC to become a Panhellenic sanctuary and
international center. This crowning comparison by Achilleus gains ironic resonance when the
audience knows that Achilleus’ son Neoptolemos later attacked Delphi in revenge for Apollo’s role
in causing his father’s death.
410 Only here do we learn of the prophecy, where it makes for the most powerful rhetorical effect.
The phrase “glory shall be everlasting” (413) occurs only here, as well, but an etymologically
matching phrase occurring in the poetic hymns of the Sanskrit Rig Veda (circa 1000 BC) has led
scholars to believe this may be a formulaic remnant of Indo-European praise traditions.
443 The most concise summary of heroic expectations in the Iliad balances words and deeds.
Achilleus’ speaking ability has just been shown, so Phoinix’s teaching succeeded; his
autobiographical account therefore gains credibility as well. In other sources, the centaur Cheiron is
said to have tutored Achilleus, but the Iliad prefers realistic persons to fantasy creatures.

481 Just as Peleus acted as foster father to Phoinix, so the old tutor can claim to be a father figure to
Achilleus, freely admitting that he treated him as the son he was cursed never to have.
502 The personified Prayers and Ruin are described in ways that match their behavior. The former
are halting and wrinkled because they act slowly, while the latter (Atê, “ruinous blindness”), comes
swiftly upon her victims. It is appropriate that the Prayers be old, since the aged Phoinix himself is
embodying the Greek entreaty.
524 Phoinix’s third mode of communicating, after allegory and autobiography, is, like the epic itself,
a recollection of famous mortal feats. The Kalydonian boar hunt was among the most important joint
heroic undertakings of an earlier generation. A war erupted over the division of spoils (note the
Iliadic theme) between Kalydon and its neighbor Pleuron (the city of the Kouretes), both located near
modern Messolonghi on the northwestern shore of the Corinthian Gulf. In most sources Althaia, the
wife of Oineus, has concealed a brand which, at the suggestion of the Fates, she snatched from the
fire when Meleagros was born. As long as it remains unburnt, her son will live. When he accidentally
kills her brothers in the boar hunt, Althaia returns the wood to the fire and he dies. In the Homeric
version, the motif of the hero being angry at his mother’s curse prolongs the episode and makes it
more closely match the details of Achilleus’ situation.
571 The Erinys appears here for the second time in Phoinix’s speech (cf. the furies at 454, his father’s
curse). The goddesses (most often pluralized) enacted vengeance for murder or other offences
involving kin. Their most famous representation in Classical literature comes in the Eumenides
(“Kindly Ones”), the third play of the Oresteia trilogy of Aeschylus (produced 458 BC).
590 Kleopatra, whose brief biography is given at 556, has a name that matches semantically
“Patroklos,” both meaning “ancestor glory.” Her role as the closest person in Meleagros’ affection
and only successful pleader parallels that of the companion of Achilleus. It may be a convenient
fiction on the part of Phoinix to make the hero heed his friend.
633 Aias’ speech, meant to shame Achilleus for neglecting his comrades, is addressed to them,
ostensibly. The analogy made is imperfect: while a victim’s brother might accept compensation from
a killer, Agamemnon has offered gifts, which (more like a bribe) put the recipient in his debt, do not
acknowledge the grievance, and imply that the giver holds the superior position.
BOOK TEN

1

The “Doloneia” (book 10, centered on Dolon) was thought by some ancient critics to have been

a separate composition added to the Iliad in the course of its textual fixation, perhaps in the sixth
century BC. Many modern critics as well have stressed its un-Iliadic or un-Homeric aspects. While it
is true that it bears no organic relation to the rest of the poem, and that its dictional choices, prolix
development, archaizing touches, and subject matter (including fascination with armor and dress) are
unusual (and more akin to the Odyssey), there is no reason to think the book was not a living part of
the Homeric performance tradition. See C. Dué and M. Ebbott, Iliad 10 and the Poetics of Ambush: A
Multitext Edition with Essays and Commentary (Washington, DC, 2010).
5

The opening simile brings together Zeus and Agamemnon to the disadvantage of the latter’s

image. The commander’s uncontrollable symptoms of despair are likened to the chief god’s
masterfully executed and powerful weather effects.
91

Agamemnon’s description of his symptoms displays more self-awareness than he has shown to

this point, underlining his desperation now that Achilleus has spurned his entreaties. His keen
analysis of his brother’s psychology (121) shows another previously unnoticed dimension of his
intelligence.
212 One mark of the difference in tone of book 10 is its radical reinterpretation of “glory” as
something that can be gained by a sneak attack on a spying mission. The rest of the Iliad treats kleos
(glory, especially as transmitted through poetry) as the result of conspicuous fighting ability in the
midst of battle. The Odyssey, on the other hand, does associate its hero’s kleos with mastery of
deceptions, such as the Trojan Horse (Od. 9.20).
243 A sense of the Odyssey’s protagonist emerges from Diomedes’ reference to his steadfastness,
intelligence, relation to Athene, and ability to come back from any danger (noted here with the same
verb that describes Odysseus’ return in the tale of his voyages).
255 The formality and detail with which this giving of arms is described make it sound like a ritual.
The importance is underlined by the antiquity of the objects described: the boar’s-tooth helmet
(dating to 1600–1200 BC) must have been a precious heirloom by the time of the poem’s composition
(if it was not simply a memory). The reference to Odysseus’ thievish grandfather Autolykos reminds
the audience of the hero’s own shiftier side.

285 While Odysseus’ prayer to Athene (278) looks forward to the themes of the Odyssey, Diomedes
once more recalls the topic of sonship and his father Tydeus’ role in another major epic event, the
battle for Thebes (cf. 4.370).
303 Hektor stresses, first, material reward rather than fame and association with the elite (cf. 212–
17), as if the Trojans have different motivating priorities. The insistence by Dolon (“Tricky”) on an
oath also bespeaks a more mercantile attitude.
415 The tomb of Ilos (the son of Tros and father of Laomedon), like the fig and oak trees, is one of
the rare spatial markers in the poem’s stylized picture of the Trojan plain. It has not been identified
with any detectable archaeological feature.
429 The list of Trojan allies is a contracted and slightly varied form of that found in the catalogue at
2.840–77. This correspondence with the narrator’s words has the effect of making Dolon’s report ring
true. The story of the slaughter is the subject of a tragedy attributed to Euripides, the Rhesus.
496 The bad dream, becoming reality (Diomedes), is a unique and unusually strong metaphor, unlike
either the conventional simile technique or other dream appearances (e.g., 2.20, 23.68).
BOOK ELEVEN

1

The major battle of the Iliad, continuing through book 17, begins with the participation of the

primary warriors, several of whom are soon put out of action.
15

Agamemnon’s elaborate armor prompts description that highlights the geographic and even

cosmic impact of the Trojan siege. The Cypriot king has acknowledged the commander’s status, in
hopes of getting a reciprocal gift, perhaps at Troy’s fall—an event that would increase his island’s
political power. In drawing attention to the upcoming action, the extended arming scene functions
like the description of Achilleus’ shield (see book 18 and his preparation for battle at 19.369).
45

Usually it is Zeus’ exclusive privilege to thunder, but Hera and Athene employ the encouraging

noise here, while Zeus rains blood to mark the imminent slaughter (53). Hektor’s appearance
completes the meteorological effects—his armor gleams like lightning (66).

86

The simile of the woodcutter imaginatively transforms the chaos of battle into ordered,

necessary labor, with its own life-sustaining rewards.
104 Achilleus’ deeds are kept in the audience’s mind through such narrative recollections, though he
has been out of the fray since book 1 and has not been seen since the end of book 9. For an expansion
of the motif of captured and released enemies see 21.34. Another vignette (9.138) similarly fills in
the exposition of past events at Troy (explaining Agamemnon’s present brutality).
218 A series of crescendo movements (Agamemnon’s battle rage, Zeus’ orders, Hektor’s urging of
the troops) culminates in a renewed invocation of the Muses (cf. 2.484), marking the onset of the
height of Agamemnon’s performance of glory (his aristeia).
223 That this son of Antenor is raised by a maternal grandfather seems to fit the pattern of
aristocratic “fosterage” attested in other Indo-European cultures (especially Celtic), although
marriage to an aunt is unusual. The geographic scope is again widened (as in 10.21) by the mention
of Iphidamas coming from Thrace on the report of a Greek expedition.
269 In the midst of masculine combat, the strongest expression of pain is childbirth pangs. As it was
at Menelaos’ wounding (4.141), women’s experience is recalled via simile.
292 As the action intensifies, the narration becomes more impressionistic, employing a kaleidoscopic
series of similes within fifteen lines, with Hektor seen as a hunter (292), Ares (295), a storm cloud
(297), and a whirlwind (306).
353 Apollo’s gift protects Hektor, as the audience hears, but Diomedes is speculating when he
assumes that his opponent regularly prays to the protector of Troy.
403 As often in the Odyssey, Odysseus addresses his spirit (thumos), giving the audience the
impression that he is more self-aware than such heroes as Diomedes or Agamemnon. Unlike in the
Odyssey, where such dramatic monologues conclude with his strategic withdrawal, here the warrior
ends with a ringing affirmation of the value of engagement.
452 Odysseus’ boast employs the language of laments by the kin of a slain warrior, especially the
rhetorical focus on the absence of mourners (cf. 22.86). A similar speaking strategy marked
Diomedes’ threat (393).

512 The fighters realize that their fortunes will worsen if they lose the surgeon Machaon, son of
Asklepios, who in turn learned healing from his father Apollo.
547 Retreat out of fear is unusual, especially for a warrior as prominent as Aias, so a double simile
highlights his essential unwillingness: he is a lion beset by dogs and villagers, or a stubborn donkey
beaten by boys.
603 The touch of foreshadowing will come to mind later in this book when Nestor advises Patroklos.
Achilleus’ call is set in the immediate context of companions aiding one another in battle (590), but
Achilleus interprets the scene as prelude to a renewed supplication for his individual services.
631 Both beverage and cup are special. The cup resembles, down to the details of its golden birds, a
chalice-shaped, two-handled example from about 1500 BC, found in a shaft grave at Mykenai,
although Nestor’s version is heroically weightier. The mixed drink (kukeôn) has been compared to
the concoction of the same name used in the mystery rituals of Demeter at Eleusis outside Athens.
670 Nestor’s long, twisting tale centers on his initiation as warrior during an episode of cattle-raiding
and reprisal. Its practical application as advice hinges on an inexact parallel, never made explicit, that
would figure Patroklos as a younger warrior whose chance for glory has now come. In fact, Patroklos
is older than Achilleus (as Nestor himself notes: 786).
690 Nestor starts, like an epic poet, in the middle of things, with his glorious return (685). We can
reconstruct earlier events: Herakles devastated the house of Neleus in Pylos. The men of Elis (the
Epeians) took advantage of this to raid the city. Then or later, they perpetrated other abuses, such as
taking Neleus’ racing chariot and team. Some time later, the Pylians conducted a cattle raid to
recover damages and with the young Nestor successfully brought home many goods; three days
thereafter the Epeians counterattacked, the Pylians mustered, and Nestor won glory in battle.
749 The Moliones were said by other ancient sources (Hesiod, fr. 18, MW) to be Siamese twins, but
this is not clear from the Homeric description and, if known, may have been suppressed, as are other
monstrous or fantastic elements.
763 Nestor makes the point of the story the contrast between his own fight for the Pylian community
versus Achilleus’ selfish isolation.
797 Ironically, in the parable, Nestor’s father had not allowed him to wear armor; Nestor now by
quoting Patroklos’ father (785–86) lures the younger man into asking for Achilleus’ armor—a fatal

suggestion.
843 The picture of Patroklos tending expertly to the wound of Eurypylos anticipates his role as
potential savior of the Greeks, healing and battle being conceived as in many ways analogous crafts.
See R. P. Martin, Healing, Sacrifice and Battle: Amechania and Related Concepts in Early Greek
Poetry (Innsbruck, 1983).
BOOK TWELVE

1

The already perilous situation, culminating in the wounding of Greek leaders in the previous

book, becomes more ominous with the reminder that the Greeks constructed their wall irreverently.
But the long-distance foreshadowing goes beyond the current setbacks in battle and even the fall of
Troy, becoming instead a reminder of the fragility of all mortal things, from the gods’ view. The
distant scene, now looked back upon from the poet’s day, recalls Greek and Near Eastern stories of a
primeval flood that wiped out earlier periods of civilization.
145 With the sustained attack on its wall, the Greek camp comes to resemble a miniature Troy, a
defensive site, enabling the audience to imagine the ineffectiveness of a Greek assault on the much
sturdier and taller city ramparts.
167 Unusually, a character employs a full-scale Homeric simile in his own speech, during battle.
175 The basic scenario of simultaneous attack on multiple gates may owe something to the story of
the Seven against Thebes, the gates of which were attacked by as many companies of warriors with
their champions. Such a complex scene is intrinsically challenging for the omniscient narrator, as the
poet goes on to say (176), but it may have provided a tour de force exhibition of compositional skill.
195 From the ill fate of the division under Asios—the most reckless ally in the attack—the focus
moves to Hektor, usually the most sensible. The mood of near victory and its unbearable tension is
encapsulated in Hektor’s response to Poulydamas’ counsel of caution. Favored as he thinks he is by
Zeus, Hektor scorns omens. The striking line 243 (“One bird sign is best . . . ”) was a favorite in
antiquity: Pliny the Younger recalls (Letter 1.18.3) how as an eighteen-year-old apprentice Roman
lawyer (in 80 AD), he plucked up his courage with this sentiment. Teachers of rhetoric in the fourth
century AD were still urging pupils to make use of the maxim.

310 The most explicit expression in Homer of a heroic contract: Sarpedon reminds his cousin of the
warrior’s obligation to fight in the front line in exchange for community support and special
treatment. The point of 323 seems to be that such regard continues after the fighter’s death. The word
temenos (“piece of land”: 313) can designate a plot set aside as a gift, but also (and primarily, in postHomeric Greek) a sacred precinct for a god or hero. The latter were worshiped in cults with
dedications of wine and other liquids, and animal sacrifice (cf. 319, of the living). In addition to
outlining the economy of heroism, Sarpedon implies that war itself is a non-zero-sum game in which
one can get glory by slaying but also give it by being slain.
391 So powerful are words as a kind of ammunition in battle that enemies avoid even the appearance
of weakness lest the other side boast. The word translated “glory” at 328 means literally “a boast”
(eukhos), and shares the root of the verb translated at 391 as “vaunt.”
445 The exaggerated strength of heroes increases with the ferocity of the attack: at 380, Aias hefts a
stone such as no man nowadays might grasp with two hands. Now Hektor pries one loose that would
take two ordinary men (with a wagon) to lift. As if on second thought, the poet adds that Zeus made
the rock lighter (450)—but leading ancient scholars rejected the additional line.
462 At the poem’s midpoint, the darkest moment of the Greeks’ situation is embodied in the
ambiguous figure of Hektor, bursting through the defensive wall, like blazing fire but also swift
night.
BOOK THIRTEEN

4

Zeus turns aside to gaze at peoples to the north, who were to the Greeks distant and

semibarbarous. Thracian territory overlaps the border between current Greece and Turkey; Mysians
lived in today’s Bulgaria (though the Catalogue of Trojan Allies knows of a another branch: 2.858);
Hippomolgoi (the “horse milker”) and the Abioi (whose name was interpreted as “without violence”)
were associated with lands the Classical Greeks knew as Scythia (now the Ukraine and southern
Russia). The righteousness of these tribes accords with the mythical notion that peoples furthest
removed in time or space from current civilization are least damaged by its problems.
13

“Thracian” Samos (later “Samothrace”), in the northern Aegean forty miles northwest of Troy,

was so called to distinguish it from the Greek island Samos that lies to the south, off the coast near

modern Kusadasi. The island was a center of the worship of the Great Mother of importance to
sailors throughout antiquity. The mountain on which Poseidon sits, 5,250 feet tall, in fact offers a full
view of the Trojan plain—evidence that this portion of the poem must be based on someone’s
personal observation of landscape.
54

Although the audience has not heard Hektor make this boast, his actions and words from book 7

onward could lead one to interpret his behavior as hubristic in this way.
71

A fleeting reference to the gods’ slight differences in appearance: even when disguised they can

be bigger, heavier (cf. 5.838), or more lovely (3.396), and even, as it seems here, have distinctive legs
(or perhaps gait). The idea that gods are conspicuous goes against the sense of book 5, where Athene
had to grant Diomedes special power to perceive them.
108 Poseidon/Kalchas interprets the quarrel from Achilleus’ point of view, and the “weakness” refers
to Agamemnon. But he still urges courage on the part of the troops. The “healing” of the rift between
fighters (or of their slackness in battle—an ambiguity) foregrounds the theme that is associated with
the saving action of Patroklos: see 11.843.
203 Decapitation is unusual and here shows the height of the Greeks’ despair and grief. Achilleus,
bereaved of Patroklos, vows to bring back Hektor’s head (18.334). Ethnographers record that modern
headhunters (e.g., among the Ilongot of the Philippines) are often motivated by grief and anger at the
deaths of friends: see R. Rosaldo, “Grief and a Headhunter’s Rage,” in Violence in War and Peace,
ed. N. Scheper-Hughes and P. Bourgois, 150–56 (Malden, MA, 2004).
206 Poseidon’s grandson is Amphimachos (185), son of Kteatos (whose mortal father was Aktor, but
whose actual father was the sea god).
278 One of the clusters of details in the poem that convince an audience the composer has seen men
in war.
301 Ares is associated with the half-wild land of Thrace. The Ephyroi and Phlegyes (named for
Phlegyas, a son of Ares) are Greek tribes associated with Thessaly.
324 The rating of Aias as Achilleus’ equal in a fight (though not in a race) coheres with the tradition
that he was deserving of Achilleus’ armor after the hero’s death. The story of his defeat by Odysseus
and subsequent suicide was part of the Cyclic Little Iliad and is dramatized in the Ajax of Sophocles.

374 Harsh sarcasm from Idomeneus comes as a surprise, but book 13 has already featured the
roughest war-making. At the same time, it is interspersed with delicate and carefully observed
arboreal similes (178, 389).
414 A triple phonic echo makes it sound as if Deïphobos is punning: Asios is not un-avenged (atitos)
as he goes to the house of Hades (Aïdos).
435 Poseidon’s spell is unparalleled as a form of divine intervention in the battle thus far. The closest
scene to this is 16.791 (Apollo strikes Patroklos), but only here is there the sense that the god puts his
victim in a paralyzed trance by visual contact. The ensuing death ends with the equally bizarre image
of Alkathoös’ heartbeat causing the spear butt to pulsate (443).
450 The Cretan king Minos, a son of Zeus, was keeper, in the famous labyrinth, of the Minotaur, a
bull-headed human-bodied monster that met its end at the hands of the Athenian hero Theseus.
460 The theme of heroic anger against a superior (like that of Achilleus) was suggested (perhaps
inadvertently) in the case of another Trojan, Paris (6.326). Here it seems to involve an actual rivalry
between branches of the royal house.
521 Gods are not omniscient but must learn, like mortals, over time. The pathos of late-learning
about a family death recalls the narrator’s observation (3.236) concerning Helen’s ignorance of the
fate of her brothers Kastor and Polydeukes.
603 Still not fully explained, the narrator’s second-person address to Menelaos (thus treated seven
times, compared to eight times for Patroklos) may depend on a perceived sympathy with the loser in
the story of Helen’s abduction. Menelaos refers to the offense explicitly (626) in his boast over the
body of Peisandros (who is here subjected to one of the gorier deaths in the poem).
643 Harpalion, son of Pylaimenes the king, is followed by his father while carried wounded from the
field. A minor mistake seems to have occurred, since an identically named man, also identified as
king of the Paphlagonians, was slain by Menelaos at 5.576. The missing blood price (659)
underscores the pathos of the situation: a son might avenge his father in war by killing, or by taking
recompense in peace, but the aging father is unable to do so for his off spring.
665 A grimmer version of Achilleus’ choice (9.410). Euchenor can have death by disease or by war;
at least the latter relieves him of paying a fine (apparently levied on war dodgers: see 23.296 on
Echepolos).

681 Protesilaos (see the Catalogue of Ships, 2.698) was first to be killed when the Greeks landed at
Troy, having leapt from his ship to shore. His ship is thus located farthest up the beach, as it arrived
earliest.
685 The “Ionians” sounds anachronistic, as Ionia (the west coast of Asia Minor as far north as
Smyrna) was not settled by Greeks until some two centuries after the time of the Trojan war. But here
they are identical to the Athenians, an accurate memory of the fact that many early colonists hailed
from that city. The Phthians come from the broader region around the homeland of Achilleus, while
his troops are specifically Myrmidons. These, by contrast, are led by Podarkes (“swift-footed”—a
name that happens to be an epithet of the great hero).
730 The principle of diversity of divine gifts underlies the characterization of heroes on both sides.
Achilleus has fighting power, but Patroklos has greater wisdom, a pairing like that of Hektor and
Poulydamas. It is interesting that dance as a skill is kept separate from the playing and singing of
music (treated together).
747 The imminent reentry of Achilleus is a real possibility for the audience as well, since we have
heard him pledge to return when Trojan fire reaches his ships (9.651).
754 The comparison to a mountain does not suit rapid movement, but perhaps alludes to the towering
presence of the warrior (cf. Od. 9.190), while the gleam of his armor matches the dazzling snow.
825 This exaggerated rhetorical expression, like that of 8.539, is not in itself impious but manages to
associate Hektor with a high ambition bordering on the wish for deification.
BOOK FOURTEEN

16

The simile is remarkable because the powerful image of sea and wind—usually describing the

actual movement of armies—is here transferred to Nestor’s mental and emotional turmoil as he
decides on his direction.
83

The exchange encapsulates both Agamemnon’s feckless decisions and Odysseus’ capacity for

enduring long pain (as he will over the next decade). The reference to their lifelong war careers

underlines the exceptional nature of this siege: no amateurs, they have nevertheless spent nine years
in an assault.
113 Diomedes’ growth as warrior and speaker is given yet another nod. As usual, the theme of his
father’s exploits arises. We learn yet more detail: that Tydeus is buried at Thebes and had once
moved from Aitolia to Argos.
132 The men who “favored their anger” are probably the Myrmidons. The subsequent swipe at
Achilleus by the disguised Poseidon (141) is meant to keep in view the overarching problem that has
brought the Greeks to this crisis.
170 Hera’s anger leads her to use sex as a weapon. The extended scene of preparation is therefore the
functional equivalent of a warrior’s arming scene.
201 Tethys and Okeanos as foster parents of Hera are not known from the mainstream Hesiodic
version of early divine history, but as Hera’s discourse in general here is deceptive, this detail, too,
could be a purely mythical construction. Another possibility is that she refers to a creation story
otherwise only hinted at in some Greek versions (cf. Plato, Cratylus, 402b) and possibly influenced
by Babylonian myths that name gods of fresh and salt water as the primal elements.
250 On Herakles’ sack of Troy in the previous generation, see 5.638–51. Zeus punished Hera by
dangling her with anvils attached to her feet from Olympos (15.18–24), the incident mentioned by
Hephaistos (1.590), who was punished in turn when he sought to rescue his mother.
271 On swearing an oath to confirm the promise of a prize, see 10.321. Hera’s cosmic witnesses
include the previous generation of divinities, now imagined as confined to Tartaros. The penalty for a
god breaking an oath sworn by Styx is to lie in a death-like trance for one year and spend the next
nine cut off from the company of the Olympians (Theogony 738).
291 The gods’ term is transparent and poetic (chalkis, “the brazen bird”), while the human term is
without obvious etymology. For similar alternative names, see Hektor’s son Astyanax/Skamandrios
(6.402) and the river Xanthos/Skamandros (20.74).
317 The Catalogue of Loves provides a humorous diversion for the audience but seems somewhat
uncouth as love talk to one’s wife and sister. It is perhaps another power play by Zeus to remind Hera
of his supreme will. The daughter of Phoinix is Europa, abducted by Zeus in the form of a bull. Zeus
omits the detail that Semele was incinerated when she persuaded him to appear in all his glory and

Dionysos was rescued from her womb. Demeter was mother of Persephonē, Leto of the twins
Artemis and Apollo.
346 The marvelous growth and dew underscore the cosmic fertility brought about by this sacred
marriage (“hierogamy”), which can be paralleled in many myths worldwide.
392 Reality in the narrative (the encroaching sea) turns immediately into simile (the sound of battle is
louder than the surf’s roar).
473 Aias’ knowledge of his enemy’s identity and kin is authentic enough, in view of the nine-year
struggle during which both sides had time to become intimately acquainted.
497 The goriness of this killing, culminating in a horrific exhibition and taunt, reinforces the feeling
that all boundaries to the excesses of war have been removed. The ferocious cycle accelerates as men
kill in order to avenge their comrades.
518 The life force (psykhê) escaping through a wound is an unusually specific anatomical detail
within the poem’s conventions for the representation of death.
BOOK FIFTEEN

26

Hera was constantly opposed to Herakles (whose name ironically means “glory of Hera”) out of

jealousy that Zeus had produced such a champion with a mortal woman. The further story of how she
made Herakles subordinate to his cousin Eurystheus is told in 19.96.
64

Zeus’ commands to his fellow gods shift into a foretelling of the plot, covering the main points

of books 16 through 22: Achilleus’ dispatch of Patroklos; that hero’s death soon after Sarpedon’s;
and the subsequent killing of Hektor. Even the fall of Troy is reaffirmed—a point beyond the Iliad.
112 Askalaphos was killed without Ares’ knowledge (13.518). The gesture of smacking the thighs
with the palms portends imminent death (e.g., 16.125; and see S. Lowenstam, The Death of
Patroklos: A Study in Typology [Königstein/Ts., 1981]). The death of a god’s son (cf. the similar
scene of Sarpedon’s killing in book 16) shows how the fear of dissent on Olympos is what
determines mortals’ fates.

165 The unwillingness of Zeus to brook a rival who would declare himself equal echoes
Agamemnon’s problem with Achilleus (1.186), while the reminder that he is stronger “in authority”
(pherteros, which Lattimore translates “in strength”) uses the same word that describes
Agamemnon’s claim to power.
189 The triple division of the cosmos is not stressed in Hesiod’s Theogony, focused as it is on the
story of Zeus’ rise to power. The motif, however, is ancient, found in Near Eastern myths.
204 On the Erinys see 9.454.
214 This is the first indication of which side Hermes and Hephaistos favor in the conflict. Unlike
Hera, Athene, Aphrodite, and Poseidon, they have limited participation.
229 The aegis, used by Zeus and Athene, is thought of as a tasseled goatskin, perhaps shield-shaped,
with magical power to stun and terrify. Most likely an ancient sign of Zeus’ sovereignty, it may be
related to the word for “heartwood” (also aigis in Greek) and thus to the god’s sacred oak, the
goatskin explanation (from “goat,” aix) being a later reinterpretation.
263 Two similes mark the crucial reentry of Hektor—he is like a liberated steed, then like a lion—
with no sense of incongruity, the emotional association of each image overriding linear sense, and the
viewpoint varying in line with his own subjective feeling versus the way he is perceived by the
Greeks as an object of terror.
379 Ironically, the Trojans mistake Zeus’ thunder, which was made in positive response to Nestor’s
prayer, as an indication that he is still supporting their attack.
461 Despite his encouragement after Nestor’s prayer (370), Zeus still protects Hektor. Teukros and
Aias, however, are unsure as to which god is inhibiting their fight by frustrating their bow shots.
Hektor acknowledges this to be the work of Zeus (489).
582 The pairing of the youngest Greek (Antilochos) with the peaceful cowherd Melanippos, recently
moved to Troy, is ripe for pathos. As with Menelaos and Patroklos, the poet addresses Melanippos in
the second person at the emotional climax of his wounding. The prewar life of Melanippos is picked
up by the ensuing simile comparing Antilochos to a wild beast that has slain a herdsman.
595 One effect of the foreshadowing is to increase suspense: although the audience is given the plot
outcome in outline, they await the exact details of battle and Hektor’s death with sustained interest.

641 Naming alone offers the sign that Periphetes is better than his father Kopreus (“Dung man”). He
carries a shield of the archaic Mykenaian type, as tall as the body.
705 The choice of location, the ship of Protesilaos, who was first to land and killed instantly, must
prompt some foreboding for the Greeks.
721 The first we hear of Hektor’s blame directed toward his elders for excessive caution. At 6.431 it
was his wife Andromachē who urged him to stay close to the city walls.
BOOK SIXTEEN

7

The picture of a young girl begging to be taken up by her mother is not a peaceful vignette, but

(as shown in K. L. Gaca, “Reinterpreting the Homeric Simile of Iliad 16.7–11,” American Journal of
Philology 129 [2008]: 145–71) a specific reference to the fate of families after the fall of cities, and
thus an ominous image.
18

At first Achilleus lumps together all Greeks with Agamemnon in speaking of their general

arrogance. Later, he restricts blame to the individual who has injured him (54).
100 The wish for exclusive glory, to be shared only with Patroklos, is somewhat broader than the
self-absorbed desire for recognition that Achilleus has just expressed (84–90), but still remarkably
harsh in dismissing Greek as well as Trojan suffering.
124 A good example of “double motivation,” when the urges of gods and humans coincide. Zeus
wants to drive back the Trojans once fire has touched the first ship (15.599). Simultaneously,
Achilleus has decided to let Patroklos carry out Nestor’s independent suggestion about entering
battle.
143 Tradition held that Cheiron the half-man, half-horse tutor of heroes, presented the ash spear at
the wedding of Peleus and Thetis. Although Patroklos has been entrusted with Cheiron’s medical
knowledge (via Achilleus: 11.830), he cannot master fully the martial arts of the Centaur.
154 Like Achilleus himself, his chariot team is a mixture of mortal and divine genealogy. Two of his
Myrmidon comrades (Menesthios, 173, and Eudoros, 179) are similarly half divine.

225 The special character of Achilleus is highlighted by what appear to be private or family rituals.
Their extraordinary nature is further underlined by the reference to Dodona, a cult site of Zeus far in
the northwest Greek territory. “Pelasgian” designates a semimythical pre-Greek population. The
mysterious Selloi (Helloi, in some manuscripts, a name perhaps related to “Hellenes”) differ from the
usual Greek priests. Their closeness to the earth might indicate earlier chthonic origins of the cult.
The scene is unusual, finally, because elsewhere in the Iliad a god never grants only half a prayer.
328 The king, Amisodaros, was not named when the Chimaira was introduced in the story of
Bellerophontes (6.179).
385 The flood tied to Zeus’ punishment of wrongdoing resembles the biblical account (Genesis 6–9).
Although missing from Hesiod’s Theogony, the flood tale appears to be a regional commonplace,
showing up in early Near Eastern literature, such as Gilgamesh.
423 Sarpedon’s ignorance of the identity of the raging Patroklos seems inconsistent with the Trojans’
belief (281) that Achilleus has returned to battle; perhaps the Lykian contingent on the edges of the
fight has not seen Patroklos’ initial foray.
433 Although Zeus laments that it is fate (moira) for his son to die, he nevertheless considers saving
him, thereby overriding the set course of events. Hera’s response affirms that Zeus is able to go
against fate, but he risks the anger and disapproval of the other gods, in a lost cause (since Sarpedon,
a mortal, must die sometime).
482 Sarpedon’s end, the first of three extended death scenes that climax the poem, is accompanied by
two similes (the tree and bull), a death speech with last words (492–501), but no speech by the killer
(unlike the subsequent examples). The presence of Glaukos here foregrounds the theme of intense
comradeship embodied by Achilleus and Patroklos: one man’s close companion has now slain
another’s.
584 The poet begins to increase the frequency of direct address to Patroklos, heightening the pathos
and intensity of the episode and situating the audience on his side of the struggle.
614 These two lines may have been interpolated from 13.504–5.
682 This scene is reproduced on one of the finest, best-known Greek vases, a wine mixing bowl by
Euphronios from about 515 BC, showing Sleep and Death with Hermes as they lift the wound-riddled

body of Sarpedon. The prized piece was at the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York until 2008,
when it was repatriated to Italy (where it had been looted from a tomb in the early 1970s).
765 An extended simile that well shows how the poet introduces a purely natural, uninhabited
landscape to parallel the action or look of human events. At the same time, we are made aware that
nature—in this case a wood of mixed trees struck by contending winds—can be thought to have its
own warlike processes. Struggle is inescapable even off the battlefield.
787 Apollo’s attack is the most direct and brutal of any god’s in the Iliad, as well as being deceptive.
The gradual dissolution of Patroklos is like a prolonged slow-motion film sequence. Even the closeup of Achilleus’ helmet, now covered by dust, is highly cinematic.
830 Hektor’s taunt to the dying Patroklos gets details wrong, and an audience realizes the grim irony.
Achilleus, for example, did not tell him to slay Hektor. It is interesting that Hektor begins with
mention of the capture of Trojan women, as if his parting conversation with Andromachē (book 6)
remains foremost in his thoughts.
853 The pervasive folk tradition that a dying person’s last words are prophetic can be seen already at
work here. Cf. Socrates’ at his trial predicting punishment for the Athenians (Plato, Apology, 39c).
BOOK SEVENTEEN

4

As the struggle to claim Patroklos’ corpse begins, the hero is once more compared to young off

spring needing protection, here a calf (cf. 16.7, a young girl).
51

The poem humanely refuses to denigrate enemies. One of Patroklos’ killers can still be

described in terms of beauty, with hair like the Graces (daughters of Zeus who embody all elegance
and joy), resembling a lovely tree.
92

Menelaos admits that it was his own quest to regain Helen that has led to the death of Patroklos.

His defense of the corpse is motivated by shame as well as comradeship.
126 Neither side are headhunters, but the intensity of grief over slain comrades leads both
increasingly to consider decapitation. Compare the threat uttered by Euphorbos that he will console
his parents, for his brother’s death, by taking home the head of Menelaos (38).

147 Glaukos, who has once before shamed Hektor into fighting, uses exactly the words of Achilleus
against Agamemnon (9.316–17) to complain that he and his men are treated unfairly by the Trojan
prince and to threaten to leave. He wants Patroklos’ corpse as a bargaining chip to regain the armor
of his friend Sarpedon—not as a prop for the glorification of Hektor.
194 In the poet’s brief comment and Zeus’ speech, the armor becomes a portentous symbol of the
mortality of Achilleus and Hektor, a sign of their imminent deaths.
250 Like Hektor speaking to the Lykians (225), Menelaos baldly states the quid pro quo for his
insisting on help: he and his brother have wined and dined their fellow commander; now is time for
payback.
290 The recompense theme is kept going in a minor key as Hippothoös, in dying while doing a favor
for Hektor (291), fails to return to his parents what he owes for his upbringing.
404 The tragedy of partial knowledge (similar to the partial fulfillment of Achilleus’ prayer to Zeus
at 16.250) corresponds to the hero’s half-mortal nature, as if he can never achieve divine
omniscience. Although Achilleus realizes he will not take Troy, he has not known that Patroklos will
die.
434 The perfect relevance of this simile to the context is increased if the poet has in mind tombstones
such as were made in Athens in the early sixth century BC. Scenes with sculpted or painted warriors
and horses might have been familiar to the audiences for epic poetry; other stêlai depicted lamenting
kinfolk. This image captures both aspects. Once more the tragic incompatibility of mortal and divine
is stressed.
570 The courage of the mosquito may seem a backhanded compliment. The image recalls 4.130
when Athene warded off a deadly missile from Menelaos like a mother swatting away a fly. Here the
hero is at the other end of the simile, as it were—the persistent attacker rather than the helpless
victim.
631 The signs of lightning and thunder (595) must convince the Greeks that it is specifically Zeus
rather than Apollo who is frustrating their shots at the Trojans. This does not prevent Aias from
praying to Zeus to make clear the skies (645), and the prayer succeeds.
709 Although Menelaos has told Antilochos (692) that Achilleus might help recover Patroklos’
corpse, he realizes that this is not possible, since Hektor now has the warrior’s armor (pending the

manufacture of a new set in book 18).
755 The image seems reversed: one would imagine the following crowd of Trojans to be noisy in
pursuit. But the comparison hinges on the frantic movement of the fleeing Greek troops, and the
cries, like those of small birds instead of raptors, emphasize their weak position.
BOOK EIGHTEEN

10

As usual, we learn from Achilleus of Thetis’ prophecies only in the face of a crisis or after the

fact (cf. 9.410). The technique is more common in the Odyssey (e.g., Od. 9.507, 13.173).
26

The description of Achilleus stretched in the dust matches that of warriors who have been slain

(e.g., 16.775), a foreshadowing of his own death once he is drawn back into war. The image of
clustering women who lament reinforces the idea that soon he, too, will be an object of grief (as
Thetis acknowledges: 96).
39

The names of the nymphs, daughters of Nereus, reflect their habitat. Most are epithets for the

sea (Glauke, “Gray”; Kymothoë, “Wave-swift”), while some refer to the mythical character of their
father as a wise old man of the sea (Nemertes, “Unerring”; Apseudes, “Without lie”). Thetis’ words
are a lament for Achilleus rather than for Patroklos, whom she does not mention.
72 The resemblance here to Thetis’ interview with Achilleus by the shore in book 1 underscores the
irony that her son has now achieved what he begged her for, with unforeseen consequences. He now
realizes that glory is less important than his companion’s life.
117 Herakles died after being accidentally poisoned through a mistake by his wife Deianeira, who
sent him a cloak thinking that the potion with which she had smeared it was a love charm (rather than
a mixture of Hydra’s blood). The story is dramatized in Sophocles’ Trachiniae. After his incineration
on a pyre, Herakles ascended to Olympos, where he was reconciled with Hera and given Youth
(Hebe) as bride.
206 The blaze that Athene makes rise from Achilleus begins a complex simile that is at once a
foreshadowing of the fall of Troy (a city under siege) and a recollection of the hero’s wrath, just
described as rising like smoke (109). Within the terms of the simile, the flame is a call for help, while

the actual fiery warrior is the answer to such a call. A similar duality occurs in the trumpet simile
(219).
301 Hektor interprets Poulydamas’ words as demagogic pleading and so calls his bluff by
challenging one who cares about possessions (by implication, one who urged immediate concern for
the city) to distribute goods to the dêmos before the Greeks acquire them.
373 The automatic tripods are almost allegories for the ease with which prestige goods, such as
Hephaistos makes, take on a life of their own when circulating in a culture of gift-exchange through
guest-friendship and inheritance. Their mobility is a striking contrast to their maker’s lameness.
395 Another fall from Olympos, different from that described earlier (1.590), which was caused by
Zeus, not Hera. Although they seem on good terms, Hera, according to her son, has tried to eliminate
him.
417 The golden robot maidens are described in terms similar to those used for Pandora (Hesiod,
Works and Days, 70–82), gifted by all the gods with adornment and endowments.
483 Archaeologists have not discovered anything as elaborate as this shield. The closest parallels are
silver plates from Phoenicia and bronze shields from Crete (possibly imports from Asia Minor), both
types having several concentric illustrated bands. The basic aesthetic principles—that big is beautiful,
that the cosmos can be imitated in one epic work—apply to the Iliad as a whole. The divine
craftsman stands in for the poet himself. It is worth noting, however, that Zenodotus, an early
Homeric critic in Alexandria (third century BC), rejected the entire description as non-Homeric.
497 The city at peace, along with its harmonies of music and marriage, also contains disputes, but has
a legal framework to deal with them. The issue at law—whether to accept a blood price or demand a
death in return—echoes the choice of Achilleus (to take compensation for being dishonored or let his
companions die).
510 The city at war is, like Troy, under siege, with the attacking army undecided as to whether it
should take a ransom (half the city’s goods) or sack the entire place. Unlike Troy, the besieged have
planned a foray outside in the form of an ambush, and unlike in the Iliad, Ares is on the same side as
Athene (516).
570 The Linos song was a lament for one who died young, perhaps because he rivaled Apollo. The
story has Near Eastern parallels in worship of, for instance, Adonis. In modern Greek folk custom,

stylized laments are still used as work songs.
590 Pastoral and agricultural scenes are capped by the dance, itself modeled on what the ultimate
mythical artificer, Daidalos, made at Knossos in Crete (home of Minos and the labyrinth). The
intricate and rapid motions of the dance are described by yet another craft image.
BOOK NINETEEN

38

Infusion of the divine food and drink, nectar and ambrosia, gives a sort of immortality to

Patroklos’ flesh. Ancient Egyptian embalming practice involved extractions and infusions through
the nostrils (Herodotus, 2.86).
60

Lyrnessos, a city sacked by Achilleus during his frequent coastal raids, yielded the war bride

Briseis (2.690).
77

It is unclear whether Agamemnon’s wound prevents him from standing or he stays seated as a

form of abasement, symbolically lowering himself in the presence of the man he insulted.
86

Agamemnon admits he made a mistake (not that he was guilty of an ethical breach), but at the

same time saves face by blaming three divinities for leading him astray (Zeus, Destiny, Erinys). Atê
(destructive blindness) is personified and then made into an instrument of the gods. Her power, even
over her own father Zeus, is illustrated by the subsequent tale of Herakles’ delayed birth, a tale made
more plausible by what the audience has already heard of Hera’s deceptiveness (book 14).
141 Actually, the offer was made two days before. At this point the gifts can no longer be taken as a
bribe (which they resembled in book 9), so Achilleus feels free to accept, though it is not his priority.
155 Odysseus’ remarks on diet and exercise appear out of place. But they fit well with the Odyssey
version of this hero, deeply involved with food and drink (see Pietro Pucci, The Song of the Sirens:
Essays on Homer [Lanham, MD, 1998]). A contrast is also made with Achilleus’ own words in book
24, persuading Priam to put aside mourning and eat.
197 Zeus and the Sun are regularly invoked in oath-taking (3.276), since both hold commanding
positions in the sky allowing them to observe right and wrong actions.

210 A gulf of feeling opens between the grief-frenzied Achilleus and the defenders of institutional
norms. The younger man makes revenge primary, an occasion for something like a ritual fast and
vow, while his elders dwell on practicalities like breakfast (see further 305–8).
282 The dramatic arrival of Briseis brings together the cause of the quarrel and its result (Patroklos
dead). For the first time, we hear her own story as widow, survivor, and trophy. Patroklos’ gentle
ways are recalled by reference to his consoling personal promise to her. The effect is amplified by the
moving line (302) about public lament for private sorrows.
327 Neoptolemos will be summoned from his maternal home on the island Skyros to Troy after
Achilleus’ death to participate in the final attack (see section B above). Achilleus’ speech accurately
captures the psychology of grief, remembering trivial events (cf. 316, on meals) while confusing
personal distress with the imagination of how others might feel.
353 As Thetis preserved Patroklos (38) so Athene nourishes Achilleus, making the pair of
companions look identical in yet another aspect.
389 An extended wordplay: Achilleus knows how to wield (pêlai) the spear of Peleus (Pêliada)
received on Mount Pelion (Pêliou).
409 Talking horses are not found elsewhere in Greek epic, although common in Central Asian sagas
(such as the Manas epic of Kyrgyzstan). Xanthos’ words resemble the account by Agamemnon,
earlier in this book, in shifting responsibility to Destiny and a great god (Apollo), the latter now
named as Patroklos’ killer and, by implication, Achilleus’. The tragic outcome was known (18.95),
but the details (death at the hands of a god and mortal) may be news to the hero.
BOOK TWENTY

5

Themis, goddess of law and social order, is the wife (and aunt) of Zeus, and daughter of Gaia

and Ouranos (Earth and Heaven). Okeanos (Ocean: 7) is the cosmic river encircling the disc-shaped
earth.
92

The raid on Lyrnessos has recently been mentioned (19.60) as the event that brought Briseis to

be Achilleus’ consort. The detail (perhaps merely imagined by Aineias) that Achilleus was

accompanied by Athene there and at Pedasos (city of the Leleges) enables one to imagine him, like
Diomedes in book 5, as protégé of the daughter of Zeus, and foreshadows the goddess’ fatal
intervention in the encounter with Hektor in book 22.
105 The Iliad depicts Aphrodite as daughter of Zeus, in contrast to the well-known version in
Hesiod’s Theogony (190–206) according to which she arose in the open sea from the cast-off genitals
of his grandfather Ouranos, and is thus older than the Olympian cohort. The latter version would
make her more like Thetis, connected to open water. The story of how Aineias was fathered on
Aphrodite by Anchises, Priam’s cousin, is told in the Homeric Hymn to Aphrodite.
122 From Hera’s speech, it is clear that the theomakhia (Battle of the Gods) has taken on a very
human element of competition, to show which ones are highest of the immortals (aristoi).
127 Yet another view of mortality: Destiny (also translated as Fate: the Greek here has aisa,
“portion,” synonymous with moira, “share”) is said to have spun a thread of a certain length
corresponding to one’s allotted span of life. In other sources, three Moirai (Klotho, Lachesis, and
Atropos) are responsible, respectively, for spinning, measuring, and cutting off the lifethread.
145 The wall is distinct from the main defenses of Troy and appears to be an improvised shelter that
Athene had used to protect another of her favorites. Poseidon (with Apollo, in some versions) built
the original walls for Laomedon, but after being defrauded of payment, the sea god sent a monster to
ravage the city. Herakles slew the monster (saving Laomedon’s daughter from it) but was also
defrauded, receiving mortal horses instead of the divine steeds that had been promised. Mention of
this tale foreshadows Achilleus’ upcoming struggle with a watery opponent, the river Skamandros.
180 Looking to rattle Aineias, his opponent cunningly selects plausible topics that hit at the weakest
point—his exclusion from the ruling branch at Troy and his former flight from Achilleus. Despite
saying in response (203) that they already know one another’s genealogies, Aineias plunges into a
detailed history of the Trojan royal house, perhaps playing for time.
303 The survival of Aineias is necessary in order to start another chain of saga, culminating
ultimately in the foundation account of Rome (elaborated by the Latin authors Virgil [Aeneid] and
Livy [History of Rome]). A tradition about this important lineage probably existed in Greek-speaking
areas of Asia Minor, where some families might have claimed Aineias as ancestor even at the time of
the Iliad’s shaping. The significance of Dardanos (304) as Zeus’ favorite explains why Aineias is at
pains to trace his ancestry back to him (215).

371 The immediate repetition of a half line (a figure of speech called epanalepsis) expresses tense
emotion, as if the speaker is fascinated with one thought: cf. 22.127.
382 Achilleus seems to shares the narrator’s wide knowledge (e.g., locating Iphition in the hills near
Tmolos) and adds even more precise details of topography. Knowing the genealogy and origins of the
foe lends authority to warriors’ rhetoric on the battlefield and burnishes their own fame by
highlighting the importance of the slain.
404 Helikē, on the Corinthian gulf in Agamemnon’s territory, had a famous shrine of Poseidon
(8.203), but the sea god was also worshiped as “Helikonian” in Ionia at Mykalē, a promontory
opposite the island of Samos (Herodotus 1.148.1). Site of the Pan-Ionian festival, this has been
suggested as a possible location for early performances of Homer, so that this brief allusion would
refer to a relevant spot familiar to audiences: see H. T. Wade-Gery, The Poet of the Iliad (Cambridge,
1952).
BOOK TWENTY-ONE

26

The sacrifice of these twelve youths will fulfill the vow made by Achilleus to Patroklos

(18.336). Only here in the battle are prisoners taken, although there have been several references to
earlier instances of opportunistic capture and return for ransom (e.g., 11.105).
54

The return of Lykaon disconcerts Achilleus since it is as if Trojan opponents are mysteriously

being recycled. The same impression arises from the frantic rush of killing at the end of book 20, and
the similes comparing victims to masses of locusts and fish (12, 22).
87

Achilleus already sacked Pedasos (20.92), home of Lykaon’s mother. The weird fate of the son

emphasizes the shift in Achilleus’ attitude. Sold off once, Lykaon now must die, like all whom the
enraged hero encounters. The change is framed by Achilleus’ consciousness of his own inevitable
death (whatever its superficial circumstances will be: 111).
132 Horses (dedicated to Poseidon) were sacrificed to a spring at Argos (Pausanias 8.7.2), but such
offerings are more often associated with more exotic nations—Persians and Scythians, for example
(Herodotus 4.61, 7.113). Achilleus may be denigrating it as a “barbarian” Trojan custom.

145 Xanthos is angered by pitiless slaughter and the buildup of corpses in his stream, but the
imminent death of yet another man, who happens to be the grandson of a different river, brings his
resentment to a boil. Achilleus uses the fluvial affiliation to mock Asteropaios (184–99), whose
backstory centers on the “recent arrival” motif already seen in the case of Lykaon.
199 The implied threat in this increasingly cosmic standoff is that Zeus can and will evaporate the
world’s waters (as nearly happened in his struggle with the monster Typhoeus: cf. Hesiod, Theogony,
844–49). The upcoming contest of Achilleus (great-grandson of Zeus) and the river Xanthos is like a
replay of that primeval battle.
274 The first we hear from Achilleus hints of a crisis of faith. Until now he has been confident of the
support of Thetis and Athene; in addition, he has learned that Hera and Hephaistos have given their
support. The potential of death by water creates here the same dread that Odysseus feels in the
Odyssey, that lack of burial would mean loss of fame (Od. 5.306–12).
390 For Zeus the battle of gods provides entertainment, since it is known that no one will die (and
even their wounds heal easily). As it turns out, their fights do not even affect the central clash of the
Greeks and Trojans.
436 On the service of Poseidon and Apollo, see further 20.145. In reminding Apollo, Poseidon
appeals to his honor and self-interest; Apollo’s reply (461) looks like an attempt to save face. For
another employment of the image of humans as leaves, see 6.146.
483 A woman’s death in illness or childbirth could be said to have been caused by arrows shot by
Artemis. The usage may be connected with the goddess’s imagined role in symbolic mock “killing”
of girls during initiation rituals. The sacrifice of Iphigeneia to Artemis, enabling the Greek expedition
to set sail at Aulis (an event ignored by the Iliad), has been tied to such an initiatory motif.
600 Apollo’s ruse to lure away Achilleus is a foretaste of the disguise taken by Athene to trick Hektor
as his death approaches (22.227). With the mass of Trojans thus allowed to seek safety behind the
city walls, it also clears the stage for the one-on-one encounter of the poem’s primary antagonists.
BOOK TWENTY-TWO

15 The book is structured around dual deceptions by gods, who arrive finally at stunned recognition
(anagnôrisis, in later Greek literary analysis): Achilleus is tricked by Apollo, as Hektor is by Athene.
The latter’s realization is tragic in tone and outcome (296–305).
29

Orion’s Dog is Sirius, the “Dog Star” thought to bring the burning heat and fevers of

midsummer (its heliacal dawn rising being in mid-July).
46 To Priam’s unawareness of the deaths of his sons, compare Helen’s equally pathetic ignorance of
the loss of her brothers (3.243), noted as she gazes, in similar manner, from the Trojan wall over the
plain.
66

Priam’s supplication of Hektor contains vivid scenes of the fate of Troy, should Hektor not

choose to defend it from inside the wall. Now it shifts into a lament for Priam himself, who pictures
the contrast between beautiful and ugly corpses. He will be killed (according to the Cyclic epic Little
Iliad) by Neoptolemos at his own doorway.
105 As earlier (6.441), Hektor is trapped by his sense of shame and pride, always imagining (to the
extent of quoting) what others will say. He briefly considers a pact involving the return of Helen and
payment of punitive damages, but rejects it as possibly leading to a disgraceful death.
147 The hot and cold springs are not only expressive of the heroes who run past them (Achilleus,
who has been compared to a blazing fire; Hektor, who feels chill fear). They also embody the open
and peaceful existence of earlier Troy in contrast to its present pent-in terror.
159 The imagery of footraces anticipates an event at the funeral games for Patroklos (23.740). An ox
at those games is second prize, the first being a silver mixing bowl.
255 Hektor apparently still believes Achilleus can be persuaded at least to a covenant covering burial
procedures, despite his decision (123) that further negotiation with Achilleus is out of the question.
299 The realization that he has been tricked is all the more swift and grim, since moments earlier
Hektor could seriously doubt that the gods were helping Achilleus (279), even though the audience
knew better.
340 Hektor’s repeated request for kind treatment of his corpse appears to be out of consideration for
his family’s feelings. It instead prompts an outburst that shows the depth of Achilleus’ rage: his
desire to have the strength to eat Hektor’s flesh (347).

359 This is the most detailed prediction yet of the manner and causes of Achilleus’ death. It follows
the pattern of prophetic last words (e.g., 16.852).
392 “Victory song” translates paiêon (whence English “paean”), which can also designate a song of
thanksgiving after healing, usually for Apollo, Hektor’s protector. The following lines (393–94) can
be read as the words of the actual song.
437 Pathos arises from the poet’s momentary suspension of the tragic scene in order to show
Andromachē awaiting her husband in domestic calm. While she has a warm bath prepared, the
audience knows his corpse is being dragged to the Greek camp.
460 “Like a raving woman” translates mainadi isê. In Greek mythical imagination “maenads” or
“maddened ones,” enthused female followers of Dionysos, are associated with ecstatic dance and
consumption of the god’s substance, wine, in outdoor settings. They also can exhibit murderous loss
of control (as in the episode dramatized in the Bacchae of Euripides).
484 The focus on the experiences of Hektor’s son brings down to human scale the disaster about to
befall the entire city. Knowledge that Astyanax will be killed by the victorious Greeks makes all the
more pitiful Andromachē’s words imagining her son’s fatherless future.
BOOK TWENTY-THREE

13

Riding around the honored dead warrior on his pyre may be an ancient Indo-European custom:

cf. the ceremony at Beowulf 3169–82.
72

It was a common belief that the spirit of an unburied or uncremated person could not enter the

realm of Hades but wandered outside it on the far side of the underworld river Styx. In his state of
suspension between worlds, Patroklos does not know that Achilleus has planned his funeral for the
next day.
85

Only now for the first time do we learn of Patroklos’ early misfortune, exiled from Opous for

manslaughter. Epeigeus (16.571) was likewise received by Peleus at Phthia, after killing a cousin.
104 Achilleus understands the look and words of Patroklos to indicate that soul (psykhê) and image
(eidôlon) survive death. That he draws the conclusion about the absence of the “heart of life”

(phrenes, the seat of intelligence, in Homer) is not surprising, since Greeks connected thought and
consciousness closely with physical organs. The phrenes were localized near the lungs.
135 Cutting of hair was an outward sign of grief and symbolic separation. The additional detail that
the corpse was thereby covered expresses the sheer number of sorrowing companions. Achilleus had
vowed to keep his long hair until, on his return, he would honor the river Spercheios with his locks
(significantly, as the gesture often accompanies initiation rituals). Now his hair-cutting will be
redirected into a mourning dedication.
171 Tombs at Lefkandi in Euboea (tenth century BC) and Salamis in Cyprus, among others, have
yielded multiple skeletons of horses, sometimes with chariots, in what are clearly aristocratic burials.
Evidence for human sacrifice at burial sites in Greece is rare but not unattested: the early site of
Lefkandi seems to offer some.
245 The temporary mound will shelter the urn with Patroklos’ bones until those of Achilleus can be
added later and a more splendid tomb constructed. The urn will repose in the hut, it seems (254), only
until the smaller barrow is ready for it. The practice of wrapping bones or container in cloth, as here,
has been confirmed archaeologically.
296 A minor but illuminating detail, revealing that at least one potential recruit could buy his way out
of service at Troy with a gift to the commander.
311 Nestor’s advice, on winning despite disadvantages, becomes a hymn to skill or “cunning
intelligence” (mêtis), a practical mode of thinking that verges sometimes on guile. Odysseus in the
Odyssey is master of this skill and therefore regularly named polymêtis (“very shrewd”).
441 Antilochos will be pressured later to take an oath that he did not use illegal moves to win, but
will decline to do so (582).
461 The remarks of Idomeneus enable the narrator to introduce a range of potential plot directions
(crashes and other mishaps), while holding the audience in suspense. It has already heard the closeup racing sequence and therefore is ironically superior in knowledge to this distant observer.
485 The first instance of sports betting in Western literature is proposed to depend not on the
outcome but on the jockeys’ positions midrace.

536 The awarding of a consolation prize equal in value to that for a second-place finish ignites a
dispute that, in a small way, resembles that between Achilleus and Agamemnon over the spoils of
war. Here the impetuous Antilochos plays the role of disgruntled young hero. Achilleus smiles at him
(555) in recognition of the kinship in temperament.
581 The oath procedure is presented as customary (themis, translated “justice” here), which argues
for a long tradition of chariot racing and related customs. That it is made to Poseidon makes sense in
view of his traditional ties to chariots and horses (and his cult epithet Hippios).
610 The elaborate exchanges of the prizes satisfy all parties: Eumelos, who would have won, had it
not been for divine intervention, nominally gets the award and a substitution prize; Antilochos saves
face by claiming the mare and immediately handing it to Menelaos, who finally gains the uppermost
hand by displaying princely generosity in giving it back to his young rival (“though she is mine”:
610).
641 Nestor nearly killed the same twins in a skirmish against the Epeians (11.749), where they are
called the Moliones. Tradition held that they were Siamese twins (and thus two were allowed to race
against Nestor on his own). The other possible hint of this odd situation is the obscure phrase
translated “crossing me in the crowd” (639, plêthei prosthe balontes), if one interprets it (pace
Lattimore) as “going ahead by reason of their greater number.”
665 Epeios made the wooden horse, at the suggestion of Odysseus (a fact not mentioned in the Iliad
but at Od. 8.493).
679 That funeral games for Oidipous were held at Thebes, his native place, goes against the fifthcentury tragic dramas that depict him as dying in exile (at Athens, usually) after the discovery of his
parricide and incest.
705 A modern audience finds it unconscionable that a serving woman fetches one-third the price of a
tripod, but the ranking no doubt reflects low life expectancy for working women, along with a highly
utilitarian outlook and market conditions.
725 The guile of Odysseus takes on added meaning for an audience aware of his later contest with
Aias over the armor of Achilleus, which Odysseus was reputed to have finally gained by trick or
bribe. (The aftermath is dramatized in Sophocles’ Ajax.)

826 A lump of pig-iron, said to be useful for making farm implements, disrupts slightly the effort to
recreate Bronze Age conditions on the part of the poet, who lets a detail of his own era intrude.
890 Achilleus’ decision to award first prize to Agamemnon based on status and repute (even before a
contest) pointedly demonstrates the change from his earlier attitude to a newfound geniality (as if
material goods have ceased to matter). On any account, Meriones deserves an extra prize in further
recognition of the spectacular display of shooting skill that won him ten axes (850).
BOOK TWENTY-FOUR

24

Hermes (here “Argeïphontes,” one of his epithets) was patron of thieves and master of cunning

intelligence (mêtis); he stole Apollo’s cattle when only a newborn baby (as recounted in the Homeric
Hymn to Hermes).
29

This is the only Iliad passage referring to the judgment of Paris. His choice of Aphrodite to

receive the apple designated “for the fairest” was taken by the two other competing goddesses, Hera
and Athene, as an insult. Aphrodite’s reward for his choice (the favors of Helen) started the war.
59

Hera’s close relationship with Thetis, not previously disclosed, gives further motivation for her

favoring attitude here (though it was ignored in book 1). Apollo’s betrayal of Achilleus, whose good
fortune he had predicted at the wedding of Thetis and Peleus, was recalled bitterly in a speech by
Thetis that survives from a lost drama of Aeschylus. If the prophecy motif is as old as Homer, the
audience will hear even more point in Hera’s denigration of the god as “faithless” here (63).
119 The solution by Zeus is intended to save Achilleus’ honor by granting him Priam’s treasures
while taking into account the objections of Apollo (and Zeus’ own respect for Hektor’s regular
sacrifices). Priam’s journey is thus motivated on divine and human levels.
165 The befouling of head and neck symbolically expresses the wish for the living lamenter to be
close to the corpse’s condition.
248 The depiction is psychologically apt—a grief-maddened father recklessly turns on the living to
take out his resentment.

291 Hekabē’s pious insistence that Priam entreat Zeus for an omen contrasts with her son’s attitude
toward bird signs (12.237). Elsewhere, only in the Odyssey are signs elicited (e.g., Od. 20.100).
Usually the gods send them unbidden.
334 Hermes the psychopompos (“soul-conductor”) was credited with accompanying spirits to and
from the realm of the dead, a role related to the knack of inducing sleep. Priam’s journey resembles a
trip to the underworld.
480 Interesting reversals mark the simile: Achilleus, whose manslaughtering hands were just
mentioned, rather than being the suppliant killer is compared to the crowd who marvel at him. At the
same time, the autobiography of Patroklos (23.85–90) is evoked by this mention of an outlaw exile.
486 Priam’s plea that Achilleus remember his father makes psychological sense to the audience that
has heard the hero recall him with increased frequency over the last days, at 16.15, 18.87, 18.331,
and 23.144.
527 The parable of the jars, meant to console Priam, presents a bleak view of life’s hardships, but one
not unique in archaic Greek literature: compare the story of Pandora and her jar (Hesiod, Works and
Days, 47–105). Rather than doling out good to one and evil to another, the best Zeus can offer
humans is a mixture, while the worst comprises evil undiluted.
560 Achilleus’ dangerously rapid change of mood is triggered by Priam’s well-meaning wish that he
return home, since the hero knows well that he is doomed never to go back to Phthia. He draws back,
in reaction, from the human sympathy just witnessed to a divine framework, saying that only the
gods’ command makes him surrender the corpse. In taking care that the body be prepared out of
sight, Achilleus shows acute sensitivity to the limits of his own self-control (584).
602 A second consolatory narrative selects an example from myth, the tale of Niobē’s boast of
superiority to the goddess Leto and its consequence. Achilleus does not draw a moral about hubris
but points instead to the necessity for food even in extreme grief. Niobē’s transformation to stone
seems a reward for endurance, a natural memorial to her eternal mourning (since water must run
down the rock face).
649 The sarcasm has as its object the sons of Atreus, as Achilleus knows they are of the sort to try to
contravene his wishes even now.

699 Kassandra, fairest of Priam’s daughters (13.366), in other sources is said to have spurned
Apollo’s love, and as punishment her warnings to the Trojans were never believed. At the fall of
Troy, she is dragged away from her refuge at Athene’s altar, although clasping the statue of the
goddess, and raped by Aias the son of Oïleus.
720 The singers (male, as the Greek text makes clear) as professional lamenters lead the mourning
ritual. The less formal lament by women is described in descending order of closeness (mother, wife,
sister-in-law), but in ascending dramatic order, concluding with the woman whose fate started the
war.
735 For the fist time, Andromachē envisions the possibility that her son Astyanax will be killed at
Troy, as finally happens.
765 While Andromachē and Hekabē dwelt on the effect of Hektor’s death and his appearance,
respectively, only Helen captures the essence of his personality, his generosity and gentle protection.
Furthermore, only Helen admits openly that she laments for herself as well (773). Her remark that it
has been twenty years since coming to Troy is an odd slip, unless it is a rhetorical exaggeration, or the
remnant of another version (traces of which are found later) according to which the Greeks took ten
years after their initial expedition (which went astray, to Mysia) before regrouping and mounting a
second.
782 The poem ends with a glimmer of hope: the doomed Achilleus relents long enough to allow the
enemy to bury their champion. That the emotional climax should center not on Achilleus but his
victim Hektor (shown to be every bit as heroic as the Greeks) speaks for the deep humanity of the
whole composition.

Bibliography

EDITIONS AND COMMENTARIES

Chantraine, P., and H. Goube, eds. Iliade: Chant XXIII. Paris, 1964.
Griffin, J. Homer: Iliad IX. Oxford, 1995.
Kirk, G. S. et al., eds. The Iliad: A Commentary. 6 vols. Cambridge, 1985–93.
Leaf, W., ed. The Iliad. Edited with apparatus criticus, prolegomena, notes, and appendices. London,
1900–1902.
Macleod, C. W., ed. Homer: Iliad, Book XXIV. Cambridge, 1982.
OTHER TRANSLATIONS AND CRITIQUES

Arnold, M. “On Translating Homer.” In Matthew Arnold: Selected Essays, edited by Noel Annan.
Oxford, 1964.
Chapman, G., trans. Chapman’s Homer: The Iliad. Edited with introduction and glossary by A.
Nicoll; with a new preface by Garry Wills. Princeton, 1998.
Fagles, R., trans. Homer: The Iliad. Introduction and notes by Bernard Knox. New York, 1990.
Fitzgerald, R., trans. Homer: The Iliad. New York, 1974.

———. “Heroic Poems in English.” Review of The Iliad of Homer, translated by Richmond
Lattimore. Kenyon Review 14 (1952): 698–706.
Logue, Christopher. War Music: An Account of Books 16 to 19 of Homer’s Iliad. New York, 1987.
Lombardo, S., trans. Homer: The Iliad. Introduction by Sheila Murnaghan. Indianapolis, 1997.
Newman, F., trans. The Iliad of Homer. London, 1856.
Pope, A., trans. The Iliad of Homer. Edited by M. Mack. New Haven, 1967.
COMPANIONS

Foley, J. M., ed. A Companion to Ancient Epic. Malden, MA, 2005.
Fowler, R., ed. The Cambridge Companion to Homer. Cambridge, 2004.
Jones, P. V. Homer’s Iliad: A Commentary on Three Translations. Bristol, 2003.
Leaf, W. A Companion to the Iliad for English Readers. London, 1892.
Postlethwaite, N. Homer’s Iliad: A Commentary on the Translation of Richmond Lattimore. Exeter,
2000.
Powell, B., and I. Morris, eds. A New Companion to Homer. Leiden, 1997.
Wace, A. J. B., and F. H. Stubbings, eds. A Companion to Homer. London, 1962.
Willcock, M. A Companion to the Iliad: Based on the Translation by Richmond Lattimore. Chicago,
1976.
ESSAY COLLECTIONS WITH
FURTHER BIBLIOGRAPHY

Cairns, D. L., ed. Oxford Readings in Homer’s Iliad. Oxford, 2001.
Emlyn-Jones, C., ed. Homer: Readings and Images. London, 1992.
Kirk, G. S., ed. The Language and Background of Homer. Cambridge, 1964.
McAuslan, I., and P. Walcot, eds. Homer. Greece and Rome Studies 4. Oxford, 1998.
Montanari, F., ed. Omero tremila anni dopo. Rome, 2002.
Myrsiades, K., ed. Approaches to Homer’s Iliad and Odyssey. New York, 2010.
Rubino, C. A., and C. W. Shelmerdine, eds. Approaches to Homer. Austin, 1983.
Wright, G. M., and P. V. Jones, eds. Homer: German Scholarship in Translation. Oxford, 1997.
Wright, J., ed. Essays on the Iliad. Bloomington, IN, 1978.
THE EPIC CYCLE, HESIOD, GREEK MYTHOLOGY

Athanassakis, A. Hesiod: Theogony; Works and Days; Shield. Baltimore, 1983.
———. The Homeric Hymns. Baltimore, 1976.
Burgess, J. S. The Tradition of the Trojan War in Homer and the Epic Cycle. Baltimore, 2001.
Davies, M. The Greek Epic Cycle. Bristol, 1989.
Griffin, J. “The Epic Cycle and the Uniqueness of Homer.” Journal of Hellenic Studies 97 (1977):
39–53.
Martin, R. P. Myths of the Ancient Greeks. New York, 2003.
Penglase, C. Greek Myths and Mesopotamia. London, 1994.
West, M. L. “Iliad and Aethiopis.” Classical Quarterly 53 (2003): 1–14.

———. Greek Epic Fragments. Cambridge, MA, 2003.
HOMER AND HISTORY

Carter, J., and S. Morris. The Ages of Homer: A Tribute to Emily Townsend Vermeule. Austin, 1995.
Chadwick, J. The Decipherment of Linear B. Cambridge, 1958.
———. Linear B and Related Scripts. Berkeley, 1987.
Crielaard, J. P. “Homer, History and Archaeology: Some Remarks on the Date of the Homeric
World.” In Homeric Questions: Essays in Philology, Ancient History and Archaeology, ed. J. P.
Crielaard, 201–88. Amsterdam, 1995.
Dalby, A. Rediscovering Homer: Inside the Origins of the Epic. New York, 2006.
Easton, D. “Has the Trojan War Been Found?” Antiquity 59 (1985): 188–95.
Erskine, A. Troy between Greece and Rome: Local Tradition and Imperial Power. New York, 2001.
Finley, M. The World of Odysseus. 2nd ed. Harmondsworth, 1979.
Foxhall, L., and J. K. Davies, eds. The Trojan War: Its Historicity and Context. Bristol, 1984.
Latacz, J. Troy and Homer: Towards a Solution of an Old Mystery. Translated by K. Windle and R.
Ireland. Oxford, 2004.
Mellink, M. J., ed. Troy and the Trojan War. Bryn Mawr, 1986.
Morris, I. “The Use and Abuse of Homer.” Classical Antiquity 5 (1986): 81–136.
Morris, S. P. “A Tale of Two Cities: The Miniature Frescoes from Thera and the Origins of Greek
Poetry.” American Journal of Archaeology 93 (1989): 511–35.
Nagy, G. Plato’s Rhapsody and Homer’s Music: The Poetics of the Panathenaic Festival in Classical
Athens. Washington, DC, 2002.

Powell, B. Homer and the Origin of the Greek Alphabet. Cambridge, 1991.
Puhvel, J. “Homeric Questions and Hittite Answers.” American Journal of Philology 104 (1983):
217–27.
Sherratt, E. S. “Reading the Texts: Archaeology and the Homeric Question.” Antiquity 64 (1990):
807–24.
Van Wees, H. Status Warriors: War, Violence, and Society in Homer and History. Amsterdam, 1992.
Vermeule, E. T. Greece in the Bronze Age. 2nd ed. Chicago, 1972.
Wade-Gery, H. T. The Poet of the Iliad. Cambridge, 1952.
Wood, M. In Search of the Trojan War. London, 1985.
Wood, R. An Essay on the Original Genius of Homer. Hildesheim, 1976. Orig. 1769 and 1775.
HOMERIC SOCIETY AND VALUES

Alexiou, M. The Ritual Lament in Greek Tradition. Cambridge, 1974.
Dodds, E. R. The Greeks and the Irrational. Berkeley, 1951.
Fisher, N. Hybris: A Study in the Values of Honour and Shame in Ancient Greece. Warminster, 1992.
Haubold, J. Homer’s People: Epic Poetry and Social Formation. Cambridge, 2000.
Lloyd-Jones, H. The Justice of Zeus. 2nd ed. Berkeley, 1983.
Martin, R. P. Healing, Sacrifice, and Battle: Amechania and Related Concepts in Early Greek Poetry.
Innsbruck, 1983.
Yamagata, N. Homeric Morality. Leiden, 1994.
HOMER AND ANCIENT ART

Anderson, M. J. The Fall of Troy in Early Greek Poetry and Art. Oxford, 1997.
Carpenter, T. H. Art and Myth in Ancient Greece: A Handbook. London, 1991.
Hedreen, G. M. “Image, Text, and Story in the Recovery of Helen.” Classical Antiquity 15 (1996):
152–84.
Johansen, K. F. The Iliad in Early Greek Art. Copenhagen, 1967.
Snodgrass, A. Homer and the Artists. Cambridge, 1998.
Woodford, S. The Trojan War in Ancient Art. London, 1993.
ORAL POETRY: INTERPRETATION AND IMPLICATIONS

Edwards, M. W. “Homer and Oral Tradition: The Type-Scene.” Oral Tradition 7 (1992): 284–330.
Fenik, B., ed. Homer: Tradition and Invention. Leiden, 1978.
———. Typical Battle Scenes in the Iliad. Wiesbaden, 1968.
Foley, J. M. Immanent Art: From Structure to Meaning in Traditional Oral Epic. Bloomington, IN,
1991.
Hainsworth, J. B. “The Criticism of an Oral Homer.” Journal of Hellenic Studies 90 (1970): 90–98.
Honko, L. Textualising the Siri Epic. Helsinki, 1998.
Janko, R. “The Homeric Poems as Oral Dictated Texts.” Classical Quarterly 48 (1998): 1–13.
Jensen, M. S. The Homeric Question and the Oral-Formulaic Theory. Copenhagen, 1980.
Kim, J. The Pity of Achilles: Oral Style and the Unity of the Iliad. Lanham, MD, 2000.

Létoublon, F., ed. Hommage à Milman Parry: Le Style formulaire de l’épopée homérique et la
théorie de l’oralité poétique. Amsterdam, 1997.
Lord, A. B. Epic Singers and Oral Tradition. Ithaca, NY, 1991.
———. The Singer of Tales. 2nd ed. With introduction by S. Mitchell and G. Nagy. Cambridge, MA,
2000. Orig. 1960.
Morrell, K. S. “Chaos Theory and the Oral Tradition: Nonlinearity and Bifurcation in the Iliad.”
Helios 23 (1996): 107–34.
Nagy, G. Homeric Questions. Austin, 1996.
———. Homeric Responses. Austin, 2003.
———. Poetry as Performance: Homer and Beyond. Cambridge, 1996.
Nagler, M. Spontaneity and Tradition: A Study in the Oral Art of Homer. Berkeley, 1974.
Parry, M. The Making of Homeric Verse: The Collected Papers of Milman Parry. Edited by Adam
Parry. Oxford, 1971.
Reece, S. The Stranger’s Welcome: Oral Theory and the Aesthetics of the Homeric Hospitality Scene.
Ann Arbor, MI, 1993.
Reynolds, D. Heroic Poets, Poetic Heroes: The Ethnography of Performance in an Arabic Oral Epic
Tradition. Ithaca, NY, 1995.
RECEPTION

Clarke, H. Homer’s Readers: A Historical Introduction to the Iliad and the Odyssey. Newark, 1981.
Graziosi, B. Inventing Homer: The Early Reception of Epic. Cambridge, 2002.

Graziosi, B., and E. Greenwood, eds. Homer in the Twentieth Century: Between World Literature and
the Western Canon. New York, 2007.
Graziosi, B., and J. Haubold. Homer: The Resonance of Epic. London, 2005.
King, K. Achilles: Paradigms of the War Hero from Homer through the Middle Ages. Berkeley, 1987.
Lamberton, R. Homer the Theologian. Berkeley, 1986.
Lamberton, R., and J. Keaney. Homer’s Ancient Readers: The Hermeneutics of Greek Epic’s Earliest
Exegetes. Princeton, NJ, 1992.
Michelakis, P. Achilles in Greek Tragedy. Cambridge, 2002.
Myres, J. L. Homer and His Critics. London, 1958.
Prins, Y. “Nineteenth-Century Homers and the Hexameter Mania.” In Nation/Language and the
Ethics of Translation. Edited by S. Berman and M. Wood. Princeton, 2005.
Reid, J. D., ed. The Oxford Guide to Classical Mythology in the Arts, 1300–1900s. New York, 1993.
Schwartz, E. et al., eds. The Legacy of Homer: Four Centuries of Art from the École nationale
supérieure des beaux-arts, Paris. New Haven, 2005.
Vandiver, E. Stand in the Trench, Achilles: Classical Receptions in British Poetry of the Great War.
New York, 2010.
HOMERIC POETRY IN GENERAL

Crotty, K. The Poetics of Supplication: Homer’s Iliad and Odyssey. Ithaca, NY, 1994.
Dalby, A. “The Iliad, the Odyssey and Their Audiences.” Classical Quarterly 45 (1995): 269–79.
Ford, A. Homer: The Poetry of the Past. Ithaca, NY, 1992.
Frame, D. Hippota Nestor. Washington, DC, 2009.

———. The Myth of Return in Early Greek Epic. New Haven, 1978.
Griffin, J. Homer on Life and Death. Oxford, 1980.
Kirk, G. S. The Songs of Homer. Cambridge, 1962. Repr. 1977.
Minchin, E. Homer and the Resources of Memory: Some Applications of Cognitive Theory to the
Iliad and the Odyssey. Oxford, 2001.
Moulton, C. Similes in the Homeric Poems. Göttingen, 1977.
Nagy, G. Homer the Classic. Washington, DC, 2009.
Pucci, P. The Song of the Sirens: Essays on Homer. Lanham, MD, 1998.
Scott, W. The Oral Nature of the Homeric Simile. Leiden, 1974.
Scully, S. Homer and the Sacred City. Ithaca, NY, 1990.
Seaford, R. Reciprocity and Ritual: Homer and Tragedy in the Developing City-State. Oxford, 1994.
Thalmann, W. G. Conventions of Form and Thought in Early Greek Epic Poetry. Baltimore, 1984.
Vivante, P. The Homeric Imagination: A Study of Homer’s Poetic Perception of Reality.
Bloomington, IN, 1970.
Whitman, C. H. Homer and the Heroic Tradition. Cambridge, MA, 1958.
Wolf, F. A. Prolegomena to Homer. Translated with introduction and notes by A. Grafton, G. W.
Most, and J. E. G. Zetzel. Princeton, NJ, 1985. Orig. 1795.
Bouvier, D. Le sceptre et la lyre: L’Iliade ou les héros de la mémoire. Grenoble, 2002.
Bowra, C. M. Tradition and Design in the Iliad. Oxford, 1930.
Collins, L. Studies in Characterization in the Iliad. Frankfurt am Main, 1988.

De Jong, I. J. F. Narrators and Focalizers: The Presentation of the Story in the Iliad. Amsterdam,
1987.
Dué, C., and M. Ebbott. Iliad 10 and the Poetics of Ambush: A Multitext Edition with Essays and
Commentary. Washington, DC, 2010.
Edwards, M. W. Homer: Poet of the Iliad. Baltimore, 1987.
Gaca, K. L. “Reinterpreting the Homeric Simile of Iliad 16.7–11: The Girl and Her Mother in
Ancient Greek Warfare.” American Journal of Philology 129 (2008): 145–71.
Hammer, D. C. The Iliad as Politics: The Performance of Political Thought. Norman, OK, 2002.
Holoka, J. P., ed. Simone Weil’s The Iliad, or The Poem of Force: A Critical Edition. New York,
2003.
Lowenstam, S. The Death of Patroklos: A Study in Typology. Königstein im Taunus, 1981.
Lynn-George, M. Epos: Word, Narrative, and the Iliad. Atlantic Highlands, NJ, 1988.
Mackie, H. Talking Trojan. Lanham, MD, 1996.
Martin, R. The Language of Heroes: Speech and Performance in the Iliad. Ithaca, NY, 1989.
Morrison, J. V. Homeric Misdirection: False Predictions in the Iliad. Ann Arbor, 1992.
Mueller, M. The Iliad. London, 1984.
Muellner, L. The Anger of Achilles: Mênis in Greek Epic. Ithaca, NY, 1996.
Nagy, G. The Best of the Achaeans. Baltimore, 1979; 2nd ed., 1999.
Redfield, J. Nature and Culture in the Iliad. Chicago, 1975; 2nd ed., 1994.
Schein, S. The Mortal Hero. Berkeley, 1984.
Segal, C. The Theme of the Mutilation of the Corpse in the Iliad. Leiden, 1971.

Slatkin, L. M. The Power of Thetis: Allusion and Interpretation in the Iliad. Berkeley, 1991.
Stanley, K. The Shield of Homer: Narrative Structures in the Iliad. Princeton, 1993.
Taplin, O. Homeric Soundings: The Shaping of the Iliad. Oxford, 1992.
Thornton, A. The Iliad: Its Composition and the Motif of Supplication. Göttingen, 1984.
Visser, E. Homers Katalog der Schiffe. Stuttgart, 1997.
Wilson, D. Ransom, Revenge, and Heroic Identity in the Iliad. Cambridge, 2002.
Zecchin de Fasano, Graciela C. “Memoria y funeral: Priamo y Aquiles en Iliada XXIV.472–551.”
Synthesis 7 (2000): 57–68.
OTHER WORKS MENTIONED IN INTRODUCTION AND NOTES

Bridges, R. Ibant Obscuri: An Experiment in the Classical Hexameter. Oxford, 1916.
Cunliffe, R. J. A Lexicon of the Homeric Dialect. London, 1924. Repr. Norman, OK, 1963.
Cunningham, J. V. The Exclusions of a Rhyme: Poems and Epigrams. Denver, 1960.
Rosaldo, R. “Grief and a Headhunter’s Rage.” In Violence in War and Peace, edited by N. ScheperHughes and P. Bourgois, 150–56. Malden, MA, 2004.
Schmidt, C. E. Parallel-Homer: Oder, Index aller homerischen Iterati in lexikalischer Anordnung
zusammengestellt. Göttingen, 1885. Repr. 1965.
Shay, J. Achilles in Vietnam: Combat Trauma and the Undoing of Character. New York, 1994.
Smith, W. B. and W. Miller. The Iliad of Homer: A Line for Line Translation in Dactylic Hexameters.
New York, 1944.

Glossary of Names

It is a frequent, though not universal, practice to Latinize Greek names, then Anglicize the Latin
forms, at least in pronunciation. I have generally avoided this practice, but have followed it on some
occasions. Names ending in ees have been made to end in es; some names end (falsely) in an, as
Danaän, Boiotian. Some endings in e have been changed to a, as Ida (not Ide), Hera (not Here).
Other Anglo-Latin forms are: Apollo, Argives, Athens, Centaurs, Egypt, Hades, Helen, Hermes,
Jason, Myrmidons, Priam, Rhodes, Thrace and Thracian, Titans, Trojans, Troy.
This glossary is not meant to be a complete index, but gives at least one reference for each name
in question (frequently there is only one) except in the case of major characters, for whom only a
complete index would be useful. References are to book and line.
Aban'tes: The people of Euboia, 2.536.
Abar'bare: A nymph, 6.22.
A'bas: Trojan killed by Diomedes, 5.148.
A'bioi: Barbarians of the north, 13.6.
Able'ros: Trojan killed by Antilochos, 6.33.
Aby'dos: A city on the Hellespont, 2.836.
Achai'a: Greece.
Achai'ans: Greeks.
Acheloi'os: (1) A river in west-central Greece, 21.194. (2) A river in Phrygia, 24.616.
Achill'eus: Son of Peleus and Thetis, (Pelei'on, Pele'ides) leader of the Myrmidons, 1.7, etc.
A'damas: Trojan killed by Meriones, 13.560 sqq.

Adme'tos: King in Thessaly, husband of Alkestis, father of Eumelos, 2.713.
Adrestei'a: City near Troy, 2.828.
Adres'tos: (1) King of Sikyon, 2.572. (2) Warrior from Adresteia, 2.830; killed by Diomedes, 11.328
sqq. (3) Trojan killed by Agamemnon and Menelaos, 6.37 sqq. (4) Trojan killed by Patroklos, 16.693.
Ag'akles: Father of Epeigeus, 16.571.
Agame'de: Wife of Moulios, 11.740.
Agamem'non: Son of Atreus (therefore sometimes called Atreides), brother of Menelaos, king of
Mykenai and chief leader of the Achaians, 1.24, etc.
Agape'nor: Leader of the Arkadians, 2.609.
Agas'thenes: Of Elis, father of Polyxeinos, 2.624.
Agas'trophos: Trojan killed by Diomedes, 11.338.
Agathon: Son of Priam, 24.249.
Agau'e: A Nereïd, 18.42.
Agela'os: (1) Trojan killed by Diomedes, 8.257. (2) Achaian killed by Hektor, 11.302.
Age'nor: Son of Antenor, one of the great captains and fighters of Troy. Fights Achilleus, 21.544 sqq.
Aglai'a: Mother of Nireus, 2.672.
A'grios: A prince of Kalydon, 14.116.
Aia'kides: Meaning “descendent of Aiakos,” used of Achilleus.
Ai'akos: Son of Zeus, father of Peleus, 21.189.
Aian'tes: The two called Aias when spoken of together.

Ai'as: (1) Son of Telamon, “Telamonian” Aias, of Salamis, 2.557, etc. (2) Son of Oïleus, of Lokris,
2.527-30, etc.
Aïdo'neus: Another name for Hades.
Ai'gai: City in Achaia, 8.203.
Aigai'os: God of the sea, father of Briareos, 1.404.
Ai'geus: Father of Theseus, 1.265.
Aigialei'a: Wife of Diomedes, 5.412.
Aigi'alos: City in Paphlagonia, 2.855.
Ai'gilips: City or locality in the domain of Odysseus, 2.633.
Aigi'na: Island in the domain of Argos, 2.562.
Ai'gion: City in Achaia, 2.574.
Ainei'as: Son of Anchises and Aphrodite, leader of the Dardanians, 2.820, etc.
Ai'nios: Paionian killed by Achilleus, 21.210.
Ai'nos: City in Thrace, 4.520.
Ai'olos: Father of Sisyphos, 6.154.
Aipei'a: Town in Pylos, 9.152.
Ai'py: City near Pylos, 2.592.
Ai'pytos: Hero of Arkadia, 2.604.
Aise'pos: (1) River near Zeleia, 2.825. (2) Trojan killed by Euryalos, 6.21.
Aisye'tes: (1) Hero buried in the Trojan plain, 2.793. (2) Father of Alkathoös, 13.427.

Aisy'me: City in Thrace, 8.304.
Aisym'nos: Achaian killed by Hektor, 11.303.
Ai'the: Mare belonging to Agamemnon, 23.295.
Aithi'kes: A people of Thessaly, 2.744.
Ai'thon: One of Hektor’s horses, 8.185.
Ai'thre: One of Helen’s handmaidens, 3.144.
Aito'lians: People of Aitolia in western Greece, led by Thoas, 2.638-44, etc.
A'kamas: (1) Son of Antenor and companion of Aineias, killed by Meriones, 16.342. (2) Thracian
killed by Aias, 6.8.
Akessa'menos: A Thracian chief, 21.143.
Akri'sios: Father of Danaë, 14.319.
Aktai'e: A Nereïd, 18.41.
Ak'tor: (1) Father of Astyoche, 2.513. (2) Apparently, an ancestor of Kteatos and Eurytos, 2.621. (3)
Father of Menoitios, so grandfather of Patroklos, 11.785. (4) Father of Echekles, 16.189.
Alas'tor: (1) Follower of Nestor, 4.295. (2) Lykian, killed by Odysseus, 5.677. (3) Father of Tros (2),
20.463.
Alege'nor: Father of Promachos, 14.504.
Alei'os: A plain in Asia, 6.201.
Alexan'dros: Another, and in the Iliad more usual, name for Paris, q.v.
Alkan'dros: Lykian killed by Odysseus, 5.678.
Alkath'oös: Brother-in-law of Aineias, killed by Idomeneus, 13.427-44.

Alkes'tis: Wife of Admetos, mother of Eumelos, 2.715.
Alkim'edon: A Myrmidon chief, 16.197.
Al'kimos: Follower of Achilleus, 19.392.
Alkma'on: Achaian killed by Sarpedon, 12.394.
Alkme'ne: Mother of Herakles, 14.323.
Alky'one: “Sea-bird,” a byname for Marpessa, 9.562.
Alo'eus: Father of Ephialtes and Otos, 5.386.
Al'ope: Town in the domain of Achilleus, 2.682.
Al'os: Town in the domain of Achilleus, 2.682.
Alphei'os: A river in the western Peloponnese, 2.592, etc.
Al'tes: King of the Leleges, whose daughter, Laothoë, was one of Priam’s wives, 21.85.
Althai'a: Mother of Meleagros, 9.555.
Al'ybē: The city of the Halizones, on the south shore of the Black Sea, 2.857.
Amaryng'keus: An Elean hero, father of Diores, 2.622.
Amathei'a: A Nereïd, 18.48.
A'mazons: A race of warrior women who invaded Asia Minor, 3.189, 6.186.
Amiso'daros: A lord of Lykia, father of Atymnios and Maris, 16.328.
Amopa'on: Trojan killed by Teukros, 8.276.
Amphi'damas: (1) A hero of Kythera, 10.268. (2) A hero of Opous, 23.87.
Amphigenei'a: City near Pylos, 2.593.

Amphi'klos: Trojan killed by Meges, 16.313.
Amphi'machos: (1) A leader of the Epeians, killed by Hektor, 13.185. (2) A leader of the Karians,
2.870.
Amphi'nomē: A Nereïd, 18.44.
Amphi'on: A leader of the Epeians, 13.692.
Amphi'os: (1) Trojan ally from Adresteia, son of Merops, 2.830; killed by Diomedes, 11.328. (2)
Trojan ally, son of Selagos, killed by Aias, 5.612.
Amphi'thoë: A Nereïd, 18.42.
Amphi'tryon: Putative father of Herakles, 5.392.
Ampho'teros: Trojan killed by Patroklos, 16.415.
A'mydon: City of the Paionians, 2.849.
Amy'klai: City near Sparta, 2.584.
Amyn'tor: Father of Phoinix, 9.448.
Anchi'alos: Achaian killed by Hektor, 5.609.
Anchi'ses: Second cousin of Priam, lover of Aphrodite, father of Aineias, 5.268-73, 20.230-40.
Andrai'mon: Father of Thoas, 2.638.
Andro'machē: Daughter of Eëtion, wife of Hektor, 6.371.
Anemorei'a: City in Phokis, 2.521.
Angkai'os: (1) Father of Agapenor, 2.609. (2) Of Pleuron, a wrestler beaten by Nestor, 23.635.
Antei'a: Wife of Proitos, who tempted Bellerophontes, 6.160.

Ante'nor: An important counselor of Priam and the Trojans, father of numerous sons who figure in
the Iliad, 3.148, 7.347, etc.
Anthe'don: Town in Boiotia, 2.508.
Anthei'a: Town near Pylos, 11.151.
Anthe'mion: Father of Simoeisios, 4.473.
Anti'lochos: Son of Nestor, close friend of Achilleus, a prominent warrior, 4.457, etc.
Anti'machos: Father of Peisandros (1) and Hippolochos (2), and of Hippomachos, 11.123, 12.188.
Anti'phates: Trojan killed by Leonteus, 12.192.
Anti'phonos: Son of Priam, 24.250.
An'tiphos: (1) A leader of the men from Kos and adjacent islands, 2.678. (2) A leader of the
Maionians, 2.864. (3) Son of Priam, killed by Agamemnon, 11.101.
An'tron: City in Thessaly, in the domain of Protesilaos, 2.697.
Apai'sos: City in the Troad, 2.828.
A'phareus: Achaian killed by Aineias, 13.541.
Aphrodi'te: Daughter of Zeus and Dione, mother of Aineias, protectress of Helen, called also the
Lady of Kypros, 3.374, etc.
Apisa'on: (1) Trojan killed by Eurypylos, 11.578. (2) Trojan killed by Lykomedes, 17.348.
Apollo: Son of Zeus and Leto, chief protector of the Trojans, 1.9, etc.
Apseu'des: A Nereïd, 18.46.
Araithyr'ea: City in the domain of Agamemnon, 2.571.
Arche'lochos: Son of Antenor, killed by Aias, 14.463.

Archepto'lemos: Charioteer of Hektor, killed by Teukros, 8.312.
Areï'lykos: (1) Father of Prothoënor, 14.451. (2) Trojan killed by Patroklos, 16.308.
Areï'thoös: (1) “The club-fighter,” father of Menesthios, killed by Lykourgos (2), 7.8, 7.137. (2)
Trojan killed by Achilleus, 20.487.
Are'ne: City near Pylos, 2.591.
A'res: Son of Zeus and Hera, fights on the side of the Trojans, 5.30, etc.
Areta'on: Trojan killed by Teukros, 6.31.
Are'tos: Trojan killed by Automedon, 17.517.
Ar'geas: Father of Polymelos, 16.417.
Argeïphon'tes: A name given to Hermes.
Argis'sa: City in Thessaly, in the domain of Polypoites, 2.738.
Ar'gives: The same as Achaians.
Ar'gos: (1) Place-name denoting sometimes a city (under the sway of Diomedes), sometimes a larger
district in the northeast Peloponnese, and used also to mean simply “Greece.” (2) Pelasgian Argos,
the domain of Achilleus.
Ariad'ne: Daughter of Minos, 18.592.
Ar'imoi: A people of Kilikia, 2.783.
Ari'on: A famous racehorse, 23.346.
Aris'bas: Father of Leiokritos, 17.345.
Aris'be: City in the Troad, 2.836.
Ar'ne: City in Boiotia, 2.507.

Arsi'noös: Father of Hekamede, 11.626.
Ar'temis: Sister of Apollo, 5.51, etc.
Asai'os: Achaian killed by Hektor, 11.301.
A'sinē: City near Argos, 2.560.
A'sios: (1) Son of Hyrtakos, a Trojan ally, killed by Idomeneus, 13.389. (2) Brother of Hekabē and
uncle of Hektor, 16.717.
Aska'laphos: Son of Ares, a chief of Orchomenos, 2.511; killed by Deïphobos, 13.519.
Aska'nia: City in Phrygia, 2.863.
Aska'nios: Leader from Askania, 13.792.
Askle'pios: The great healer, father of Machaon and Podaleirios, 2.731.
Aso'pos: River in Boiotia, 4.383.
Asple'don: City of the Minyai, near Orchomenos, 2.511.
Assar'akos: Son of Tros, brother of Ilos, great-grandfather of Aineias, 20.232.
Aster'ion: City in Thessaly, in the domain of Eurypylos, 2.735.
Asteropai'os: Leader of the Paionians, one of the greatest of the Trojan allies, 12.102; killed by
Achilleus, 21.140-83.
Asty'alos: Trojan killed by Polypoites, 6.29.
Asty'anax: Hektor’s infant son, 6.403.
Asty'noös: (1) Trojan killed by Diomedes, 5.144. (2) A Trojan charioteer, 15.455.
Asty'ochē: Mother, by Ares, of Askalaphos and Ialmenos, 2.513.
Astyochei'a: Mother of Tlepolemos, 2.658.

Asty'pylos: Paionian killed by Achilleus, 21.209.
Athe'ne: or Pallas Athene, also called Tritogeneia, daughter of Zeus, protectress of the Achaians,
particularly Achilleus, Diomedes, and Odysseus, 1.194, etc.
Ath'ens: The city of Erechtheus, in east-central Greece, 2.546.
Ath'os: Mountain and promontory in the northern Aegean, 14.229.
Atrei'des: “Son of Atreus,” used of Agamemnon, less often of Menelaos.
At'reus: Father of Agamemnon and Menelaos, 2.105.
Atryto'ne: Epithet of Athene, 1.157.
Atym'nios: (1) Father of Mydon, 5.581. (2) Trojan, brother of Maris, killed by Antilochos, 16.317.
Augei'ai: (1) City in Lokris, 2.532. (2) City in Lakedaimon, 2.583.
Augei'as: Lord of Elis, 11.701.
Au'lis: A city at the narrows between Euboia and the mainland, where the ships of the Achaians
assembled for the expedition to Troy, 2.303.
Auto'lykos: Maternal grandfather of Odysseus, 10.266.
Auto'medon: Follower and charioteer of Achilleus and Patroklos, a considerable warrior in his own
right, 16.145, 17.429.
Auto'noös: (1) Achaian killed by Hektor, 11.301. (2) Trojan killed by Patroklos, 16.694.
Auto'phonos: Father of Polyphontes, 4.395.
Ax'ios: A river, and river-god, in Paionia, 2.849.
Ax'ylos: Trojan ally from Arisbe, killed by Diomedes, 6.12.
A'zeus: Father, or ancestor, of Aktor (1), 2.513.

Bal'ios: One of the immortal horses of Achilleus, 16.149.
Bath'ykles: Myrmidon killed by Glaukos, 16.594.
Bellerophon'tes: Hero from Korinth, killer of the Chimaira, grandfather of Sarpedon and Glaukos
(now usually called Bellerophon), 6.155-202.
Bes'sa: City in Lokris, 2.532.
Bias: (1) Leader under Nestor, 4.296. (2) Athenian, leader under Menestheus, 13.691. (3) Father of
Dardanos (2) and Laogonos (2), 20.461.
Bie'nor: Trojan killed by Agamemnon, 11.92.
Boag'rios: River in Lokris, 2.533.
Boi'be: Thessalian city in the domain of Eumelos, 2.712.
Boibe'is: The lake by which Boibe was situated, 2.711.
Boio'tians: The people of Boiotia, in central Greece northwest of Attica, 2.494.
Bor'eas: The north (more accurately northeast) wind, 9.4.
Bo'ros: (1) Father of Phaistos, 5.44. (2) Husband of Polydore, 16.177.
Boudei'on: Town in the territory of the Myrmidons, 16.572.
Boukol'ion: Son of Laomedon, father of Aisepos (2) and Pedasos (1), 6.22.
Bou'kolos: Father of Sphelos, grandfather of Iasos, 15.338.
Boupra'sion: City in Elis, 2.615.
Briar'eos: A hundred-handed giant, 1.403.
Brise'is: The captive mistress of Achilleus, 1.184; her life story, 19.282-300.
Bri'seus: Father of Briseis, 1.392.

Brysei'ai: City in Lakedaimon, 2.583.
Cen'taurs: Creatures, part human and part beast, at home around Mount Pelion, 11.832.
Chal'kis: (1) City in Euboia, 2.537. (2) City in Aitolia, 2.640. (3) Name of a bird, 14.291.
Chalko'don: Father, or ancestor, of Elephenor, 2.541.
Charis: Goddess, wife of Hephaistos, 18.382-93.
Char'opos: Father of Nireus, 2.672.
Charops: Trojan killed by Odysseus, 11.427.
Chei'ron: “Most righteous of the Centaurs,” friend and teacher of Asklepios, 4.219; of Achilleus,
11.832; of Peleus, 16.143.
Chersi'damas: Trojan killed by Odysseus, 11.423.
Chimai'ra: Lykian monster killed by Bellerophontes, 6.179.
Chro'mios: (1) Follower (in the Odyssey, 11.286, brother) of Nestor, 4.295. (2) Son of Priam killed by
Diomedes, 5.160. (3) Lykian killed by Odysseus, 5.677. (4) Trojan killed by Teukros, 8.275. (5) A
Trojan captain, 17.218.
Chromis: Leader of the Mysians, killed by Achilleus, 2.858.
Chry'se: Town near Troy, the home of Chryses, 1.37.
Chryse'is: Daughter of Chryses, captive mistress of Agamemnon, released by him to her father (later
Criseyde, Cressida), 1.111, etc.
Chryses: Priest of Apollo, father of Chryseis, 1.11.
Chryso'themis: Daughter of Agamemnon, 9.145.
Dai'dalos: Builder in Krete, 18.592.

Dai'tor: Trojan killed by Teukros, 8.275.
Dam'asos: Trojan killed by Polypoites, 12.183.
Damas'tor: Father of Tlepolemos (2), 16.416.
Dan'aäns: Achaians, Argives.
Dan'aë: Mother, by Zeus, of Perseus, 14.319.
Dardan'ia: The domain of Dardanos, 20.216.
Dardanian, Dardanians: Of Dardania, or descended from, or pertaining to, Dardanos. Used of the
group of Trojans whose lord was Aineias, 2.819.
Dar'danos: (1) Son of Zeus, father of Erichthonios, ancestor of the Trojan kings, 20.215. (2) Son of
Bias, killed by Achilleus, 20.460.
Dar'es: Priest of Hephaistos in Troy, father of Phegeus and Idaios (2), 5.9.
Dau'lis: City near Pytho, 2.520.
Deï'koön: Companion of Aineias, killed by Agamemnon, 5.534.
Deï'ochos: Achaian killed by Paris, 15.341.
Deïopi'tes: Trojan killed by Odysseus, 11.420.
Deï'phobos: Son of Priam, one of the more powerful Trojan fighters, 13.156, 13.402; impersonated
by Athene in order to swindle Hektor, 22.227-95.
Deï'pylos: Companion of Sthenelos, 5.325.
Deï'pyros: Achaian killed by Helenos, 13.576.
Deise'nor: Trojan captain, 17.217.
Deme'ter: Sister of Zeus, goddess of the earth as giver of food, 5.500, etc.

Demo'koön: Bastard son of Priam, killed by Odysseus, 4.499.
Demo'leon: Son of Antenor, killed by Achilleus, 20.395.
Demou'chos: Trojan killed by Achilleus, 20.457.
Deuka'lion: (1) Hero of Krete, father of Idomeneus, 12.117, 13.451. (2) Trojan killed by Achilleus,
20.477.
Dexa'menē: A Nereïd, 18.44.
Dex'ios: Father of Iphinoös, 7.15.
Dio'kles: Father of Orsilochos (1) and Krethon, 5.542.
Diome'de: Captive mistress of Achilleus, 9.665.
Diome'des: Son of Tydeus, lord, with Sthenelos and Euryalos, of Argos proper, one of the greatest of
the Achaian fighters, prominent in battle until wounded by Paris, 11.368-400.
Di'on: City in Euboia, 2.538.
Dio'ne: Mother of Aphrodite, 5.370-417.
Diony'sos: Son of Zeus and Semele, driven into the sea by Lykourgos, 6.132-37.
Dio'res: (1) A leader of the Epeians, 2.622; killed by Peiros, 4.517. (2) Father of Automedon, 17.429.
Di'os: Son of Priam, 24.251.
Dodo'na: Place in Epeiros in extreme northwest Greece, site of an oracle of Zeus, 2.750, 16.233.
Do'lon: Trojan scout, killed by Diomedes and Odysseus, 10.313-464.
Dol'opes: People “in remotest Phthia” ruled over by Phoinix, 9.484.
Dolopi'on: Priest of Skamandros in Troy, father of Hypsenor (1), 5.77.
Dol'ops: (1) Achaian killed by Hektor, 11.302. (2) Trojan killed by Menelaos, 15.525-43.

Doris: A Nereïd, 18.45.
Dory'klos: Son of Priam, killed by Aias, 11.489.
Doto: A Nereïd, 18.43.
Douli'chion: Island in the domain of Meges, 2.625.
Dra'kios: A leader of the Epeians, 13.692.
Dry'as: (1) Hero of the generation of Nestor, 1.263. (2) Father of Lykourgos (1), 6.130.
Dry'ops: Trojan killed by Achilleus, 20.455.
Dy'mas: Father of Hekabē and of Asios (2), 16.718.
Dyna'menē: A Nereïd, 18.43.
Eche'kles: Myrmidon, son of Aktor (4), husband of Polymele, 16.189.
Eche'klos: (1) Trojan killed by Patroklos, 16.694. (2) Trojan, son of Agenor, killed by Achilleus,
20.474.
Echem'mon: Son of Priam, killed by Diomedes, 5.160.
Echepo'los: (1) Trojan killed by Antilochos, 4.458. (2) Son of Anchises, 23.296.
Echi'nai: Islands in the domain of Meges, 2.625.
E'chios: (1) Father of Mekisteus, 8.332. (2) Achaian killed by Polites, 15.339. (3) Lykian killed by
Patroklos, 16.416.
Eëriboi'a: Stepmother of Ephialtes and Otos, 5.389.
Eë'tion: (1) King of Thebe, father of Andromache, killed by Achilleus, 6.414-20. (2) Father of Podes,
17.575 (perhaps identical with the aforementioned). (3) A lord of Imbros, 21.43.
Eileithy'ia: Goddess of childbirth, 16.187.

Eile'sion: City in Boiotia, 2.499.
Eï'ones: City near Argos, 2.561.
Eï'oneus: (1) Achaian killed by Hektor, 7.11. (2) Father of Rhesos, 10.435.
El'asos: Trojan killed by Patroklos, 16.696.
El'atos: Trojan ally killed by Agamemnon, 6.33.
Elei'ans: The people of Elis, 11.673.
El'eon: City in Boiotia, 2.500.
Elephe'nor: Leader of the Abantes, 2.540; killed by Agenor, 4.463-69.
Elis: City and district of the western Peloponnese, adjoining the domain of Nestor, 2.615, etc.
Elo'ne: City in Thessaly, in the domain of Polypoites, 2.739.
Ema'thia: District to the northwest of the Aegean, later part of Macedonia, 14.226.
En'etoi: A Paphlagonian tribe, 2.852.
Enie'nes: People from the extreme northwest of Thessaly, 2.749.
Eni'opeus: Charioteer of Hektor, killed by Diomedes, 8.120.
Enis'pe: Town in Arkadia, 2.606.
En'nomos: (1) Leader of the Mysians and augur, killed by Achilleus, 2.858-61. (2) Trojan killed by
Odysseus, 11.422.
En'opē: Town near Pylos, 9.150.
En'ops: (1) Father of Satnios, 14.444. (2) Father of Thestor, 16.402 (perhaps identical with the
aforementioned). (3) Father of Klytomedes, 23.634.
Eny'eus: King of Skyros, 9.668.

Eny'o: War goddess, 5.333.
Epal'tes: Lykian killed by Patroklos, 16.415.
Epei'ans: People of Elis, 2.619.
Epei'geus: Myrmidon killed by Hektor, 16.570-80.
Epei'os: Achaian, a great boxer and winner of this event in the games for Patroklos, 23.664-99 (in the
Odyssey, 8.493, builder of the Trojan Horse).
Ephial'tes: Giant who with his brother Otos imprisoned Ares, 5.385.
Eph'yra or Eph'yrē: (1) A place on the river Selleëis, exact location unknown, 2.659. (2) Homeric
name for Korinth, 6.152.
Eph'yroi: A northern people visited by Ares, 13.301.
Epidau'ros: City in the domain of Diomedes, 2.561.
Epi'kles: Lykian killed by Aias, 12.379.
Epis'tor: Trojan killed by Patroklos, 16.695.
Epis'trophos: (1) Leader of the men of Phokis, 2.517. (2) Prince of Lyrnessos, killed by Achilleus,
2.692. (3) Leader of the Halizones, 2.856.
Ep'ytos: Father of Periphas, 17.324.
Erech'theus: Hero of Athens, 2.547.
Ereutha'lion: Arkadian hero killed by Nestor, 7.136.
Erichthon'ios: Son of Dardanos, ancestor of the kings of Troy, 20.219.
Erin'ys: Spirit of vengeance, 9.571.
Erio'pis: Wife of Oïleus (1) and stepmother of Medon (1), 13.697.

Eryla'os: Trojan killed by Patroklos, 16.411.
Er'ymas: (1) Trojan killed by Idomeneus, 16.345. (2) Trojan killed by Patroklos, 16.415.
Erythi'noi: Place in Paphlagonia, 2.855.
Ery'thrai: City in Boiotia, 2.499.
Eteo'kles: Son of Oidipous, defender of Thebes against the Argives, 4.386.
Eteo'nos: City in Boiotia, 2.497.
Euai'mon: Father of Eurypylos (1), 2.736.
Euboi'a: Island lying close off east-central Greece, 2.536.
Euche'nor: Achaian killed by Paris, 13.663-72.
Eudor'os: Son of Hermes and Polymele, a Myrmidon captain, 16.179.
Eue'nos: (1) Father of Epistrophos (2) and Mynes, 2.693. (2) Father of Marpessa, 9.557.
Euip'pos: Lykian killed by Patroklos, 16.417.
Eume'des: Herald in Troy, father of Dolon, 10.314.
Eume'los: Son of Admetos and Alkestis, lord of the Thessalians from Pherai, 2.713. Prominent in the
chariot race in the games for Patroklos, 23.288-565.
Eune'os: Son of Jason and Hypsipyle, lord in Lemnos, 7.468.
Euphe'mos: Trojan ally, leader of the Kikonians, 2.846.
Euphe'tes: Lord of Ephyra (1), 15.532.
Euphor'bos: Dardanian, son of Panthoös, who struck down Patroklos, 16.806-15; killed by Menelaos,
17.43-60.
Euro'pa: Daughter of Phoinix, mother of Minos and Rhadamanthys, 14.321.

Eury'alos: Leader, with Diomedes and Sthenelos, of the men of Argos proper, 2.565.
Eury'bates: (1) Herald for Agamemnon, 1.320. (2) Herald for Odysseus, 2.184. (The two are
probably the same person.)
Eury'damas: A dream-interpreter, father of Abas and Polyidos (1), 5.149.
Eury'medon: (1) Charioteer of Agamemnon, 4.228. (2) Charioteer of Nestor, 8.114.
Eury'nomē: Daughter of Ocean, 18.398.
Eury'pylos: (1) Son of Euaimon, lord of a district in Thessaly which has not been certainly located,
2.736; wounded and put out of action by Paris, 11.575-95, etc. (2) Hero of Kos, 2.677.
Eurys'theus: Taskmaster of Herakles, 8.363, 19.107-25.
Eu'rytos: (1) Hero of Oichalia, 2.596. (2) Father of Thalpios, brother of Kteatos, 2.621; he and his
brother called Moliones, 11.709, 11.750.
Eusso'ros: Father of Akamas (2), 6.8.
Eutre'sis: City in Boiotia, 2.502.
Exa'dios: Hero of the generation of Nestor, 1.264.
Galatei'a: A Nereïd, 18.45.
Ganyme'des: Son of Tros (1), caught up among the gods and made immortal, 20.232-35.
Gar'garon or Gar'garos: The peak of Ida, 8.48.
Gere'nian: Epithet of Nestor, 2.336, etc.
Gla'phyrai: Thessalian city in the domain of Eumelos, 2.712.
Glau'ke: A Nereïd, 18.39.

Glau'kos: (1) Companion of Sarpedon, second in command of the Lykians, 2.876; wounded by
Teukros, 12.387-89. (2) Father of Bellerophontes, great-grandfather of Glaukos (1), 6.154-55.
Glisas: City in Boiotia, 2.504.
Gonoës'sa: Achaian city in the domain of Agamemnon, 2.573.
Gor'gon: A staring monster, 5.741.
Gorgy'thion: Son of Priam and Kastianeira, killed by Teukros, 8.302-8.
Gor'tyna: City in Krete, 2.646.
Gou'neus: Lord of the peoples around Dodona, 2.748.
Grai'a: City in Boiotia, 2.498.
Greni'kos: River of the Troad, 12.21.
Gygai'an: Of a lake in Mysia, 2.865.
Gy'ge: The same lake, 20.391.
Gyr'tios: Father of Hyrtios, 14.512.
Gyrto'ne: Thessalian city in the domain of Polypoites, 2.738.
Ha'des: Properly Aï'des. Son of Kronos and Rhea, full brother of Zeus, Poseidon, Hera, and Demeter,
15.187-92. Lord over the dead, loc. cit.; 1.3, etc. (n.b. A person, not a place.)
Hai'mon: (1) Companion of Nestor, 4.296. (2) Father of Maion, 4.394. (3) Father of Laërkes, 17.467.
Ha'lia: A Nereïd, 18.40.
Haliar'tos: City in Boiotia, 2.503.
Ha'lios: Lykian killed by Odysseus, 5.678.
Halizo'nes: A tribe from the Black Sea district, led by Odios (1) and Epistrophos (3), 2.856.

Harma: City in Boiotia, 2.499.
Harmon'ides: Smith in Troy, father of Phereklos, 5.60.
Harpal'ion: Paphlagonian ally of Troy killed by Meriones, 13.643-59.
He'be: Or Youth, daughter of Zeus and Hera, ministrant to other Olympians, 4.2, 5.722, etc.
Hek'abē: Daughter of Dymas, Priam’s queen, 6.251, 22.79, etc.
Hekame'de: Captive mistress of Nestor, 11.624.
Hektor: Son of Priam, field commander of the Trojans and their greatest fighter, killer of Patroklos,
16.816-42; killed by Achilleus, 22.273-363.
Helen: Wife of Menelaos who ran away with Paris, the cause of the war, 3.121, etc.
Hel'enos: (1) Achaian killed by Hektor, 5.707. (2) Son of Priam, augur and fighter, 6.76, 6.576, etc.
Helika'on: Son of Antenor, husband of Laodike, 3.123.
Hel'ikē: Place in the domain of Agamemnon, on the Corinthian Gulf, 2.575.
Hellas: The domain, or part of the domain, of Peleus, 2.683, etc.
Hellenes: The people of Hellas, 2.684.
Hel'lespont: Strait between the Troad and Thrace, now Dardanelles, 2.845, etc.
Helos: (1) City in Lakedaimon, 2.584. (2) City near Pylos, 2.594.
Hephais'tos: Son of Hera, 1.571; artificer, 1.607, etc.; fire god, 21.330-81, etc.
Hepta'poros: River in the Troad, 12.20.
Hera: Daughter of Kronos and Rhea, full sister and wife of Zeus, protector of the Achaians, 1.55, etc.
Her'akles: Son of Alkmene and Zeus, 14.324; father of Tlepolemos (1), 2.658; of Thessalos, 2.679.

Her'mes: Son of Zeus, called guide and Argeïphontes, 2.104, etc.
Hermi'onē: City in the domain of Diomedes, 2.560.
Hermos: River in Phrygia, 20.392.
Hesper: The evening star, 22.318.
Hiketa'on: Son of Laomedon, 20.238; father of Melanippos (2), 15.546.
Hippo'damas: Trojan killed by Achilleus, 20.401.
Hippodamei'a: (1) Wife of Peirithoös, mother of Polypoites, 2.472. (2) Daughter of Anchises, wife of
Alkathoös, 13.429.
Hippo'damos: Trojan killed by Odysseus, 11.335.
Hippo'koön: Cousin of Rhesos, 10.518.
Hippo'lochos: (1) Father of Glaukos (1), 6.119. (2) Trojan killed by Agamemnon, 11.122-47.
Hippo'machos: Trojan killed by Leonteus, 12.189.
Hippomol'goi: A northern tribe, “horse-milkers,” presumably nomads, 13.5.
Hippo'noös: Achaian killed by Hektor, 11.303.
Hippo'thoös: (1) Trojan ally, leader of the Pelasgians, 2.840; killed by Aias, 17.293. (2) Son of Priam,
24.251.
Hippo'tion: Chief from Askania, 13.793; killed by Meriones, 14.514.
Hi're: Town near Pylos, 9.150.
Histiai'a: City in Euboia, 2.537.
Hy'adēs: The stars still so called, 18.486.
Hyam'polis: City in Phokis, 2.521.

Hy'de: District around Mount Tmolos, 20.385.
Hy'le: City in Boiotia, 2.500.
Hyl'los: River in Mysia, 20.392.
Hypei'rochos: (1) Trojan killed by Odysseus, 11.335. (2) Father of Itymoneus, 11.673.
Hypei'ron: Trojan killed by Diomedes, 5.144.
Hyperei'a: A spring in the domain of Eurypylos, 2.734.
Hypere'nor: Son of Panthoös, killed by Menelaos, 14.516, 17.24.
Hypere'sia: Achaian city in the domain of Agamemnon, 2.573.
Hyper'ion: Epithet of Helios, the Sun, 8.480.
Hypse'nor: (1) Trojan killed by Eurypylos, 5.76-83. (2) Achaian killed by Deïphobos, 13.411.
Hypsi'pyle: Mother, by Jason, of Euneos, 7.469.
Hy'ria: City in Boiotia, 2.496.
Hyrmi'ne: City in Elis, 2.616.
Hyr'takos: Father of Asios (1), 2.837.
Hyr'tios: Mysian killed by Aias, 14.511.
Iai'ra: A Nereïd, 18.42.
Ial'menos: A leader of the Minyai from Orchomenos, 2.512.
Ialy'sos: City in Rhodes, 2.656.
Ia'menos: Trojan killed by Leonteus, 12.194.
Ianas'sa: A Nereïd, 18.47.

Ianei'ra: A Nereïd, 18.47.
Ia'petos: One of the Titans, 8.479.
Iar'danos: River apparently on the borders of Pylos and Arkadia, 7.135.
I'asos: Athenian killed by Aineias, 15.332-38.
Ida: Mountain and range in the Troad, 2.821, etc.
Idai'os: (1) Herald of Priam, 3.248, 7.381-97. (2) Trojan, son of Dares and brother of Phegeus,
rescued from Diomedes by Hephaistos, 5.11-24.
Idas: Husband of Marpessa and father of Kleopatra, who contended against Apollo for the sake of
Marpessa, 9.556-60.
Ido'meneus: Son of Deukalion, lord of Krete, one of the great princes and fighters of the Achaians,
2.645, etc.
Ika'ria: Island off the coast of Asia Minor, 2.145.
Ilion: Or Ilios; Troy, the city of Ilos.
Ili'oneus: Trojan killed by Peneleos, 14.489-99.
Ilos: Eldest son of Tros, father of Laomedon, grandfather of Priam, 20.232.
Im'brasos: Thracian, father of Peiros, 4.520.
Im'brios: Trojan ally from Pedaios, killed by Teukros, 13.170.
Im'bros: Island northwest of Troy, 13.33.
Iol'kos: Thessalian town in the domain of Eumelos, 2.712.
Io'nians: A people closely associated with, perhaps identified with, the Athenians, 13.685.
Iph'eus: Lykian killed by Patroklos, 16.417.

Iphianas'sa: Daughter of Agamemnon, 9.145.
Iphi'damas: Son of Antenor, killed by Agamemnon, 11.221-47.
Iphi'klos: Runner defeated by Nestor, 23.636.
Iphi'noös: Achaian killed by Glaukos, 7.14.
Iphis: Captive mistress of Patroklos, 9.667.
Iphi'tion: Lydian killed by Achilleus, 20.382.
Iph'itos: (1) Father of Schedios (1) and Epistrophos (1), 2.518. (2) Father of Archeptolemos, 8.128.
Iris: The messenger of the gods, 2.786, etc.
Isan'dros: Son of Bellerophontes, 6.197.
Isos: Son of Priam, killed by Agamemnon, 11.111-21.
Ithai'menes: Father of Sthenelaos, 16.586.
Ith'aka: Island off west-central Greece, the home of Odysseus, 2.632, etc.
Itho'me: Thessalian city in the domain of Podaleirios and Machaon, 2.729.
Iton: Thessalian city in the domain of Protesilaos, 2.696.
Ity'moneus: Eleian killed by Nestor in his youth, 11.672.
Ixi'on: Putative father of Peirithoös, 14.317.
Jason: The Argonaut, father of Euneos, 7.468.
Kabe'sos: City, location unknown, on the Trojan side, 13.363.
Kadmei'ans: Thebans, 4.388, etc.
Kai'neus: Hero of the generation of Nestor, 1.264.

Kal'chas: Augur for the Achaians, 1.68-100, 2.300-332. Impersonated by Poseidon, 13.45.
Kale'sios: Charioteer of Axylos, killed by Diomedes, 6.18.
Kale'tor: (1) Father of Aphareus, 13.541. (2) Trojan killed by Aias, 15.419.
Kallianas'sa: A Nereïd, 18.46.
Kallianei'ra: A Nereïd, 18.44.
Kalli'aros: City in Lokris, 2.531.
Kalyd'nai: Islands in the southeast Aegean, 2.677.
Kal'ydon: City of Aitolia, its men led by Thoas, 2.640. For a part of the Kalydonian Saga, see 9.52999.
Kamei'ros: City of Rhodes, 2.656.
Kap'aneus: Father of Sthenelos, 2.564.
Kap'ys: Son of Assarakos, father of Anchises, so grandfather of Aineias, 20.239.
Karda'mylē: Town near Pylos, 9.150.
Kare'sos: River in the Troad, 12.20.
Kar'ians: People of Asia Minor who held the city of Miletos, 2.867.
Karys'tos: City of Euboia, 2.539.
Ka'sos: Island near Kos, 2.676.
Kassan'dra: Daughter of Priam, 13.366, 24.699.
Kastianei'ra: Mother, by Priam, of Gorgythion, 8.304.
Kastor: Brother of Helen, 3.327.

Kaukon'ians: People of Asia Minor allied to the Trojans, 10.429.
Kaÿst'rian: Of the river Kaÿstros in Asia Minor, 2.461.
Ke'as: Father of Troizenos, 2.847.
Kebri'ones: Brother of Hektor, 8.318; killed by Patroklos, 16.737-76.
Kel'adon: River apparently on the borders of Pylos and Arkadia, 7.134.
Kephalle'nia: Island off west-central Greece, in the domain of Odysseus, 2.631.
Kephisian mere: A lake, more commonly called Kopa'is, in Boiotia, 5.709.
Kephi'sos: River in Phokis (and Boiotia), 2.522.
Kerin'thos: City in Euboia, 2.538.
Kikonian: Of a Thracian people, also called Kiko'nes, 2.846.
Kili'kians: In Homer, only of the people in Asian Thebe, 6.397, 6.415.
Kil'la: Town in the Troad, 1.38.
Kin'yras: King of Cyprus who gave a corselet to Agamemnon, 11.20.
Kis'seus: Father of Theano, 11.223.
Klei'tos: Charioteer of Poulydamas, killed by Teukros, 15.445-53.
Kleobou'los: Trojan killed by Aias (2), 16.330-34.
Kleo'nai: City in the domain of Agamemnon, 2.570.
Kleopat'ra: Daughter of Idas and Marpessa, wife of Meleagros, 9.556.
Klo'nios: A leader of the Boiotians, 2.495; killed by Agenor, 15.340.
Kly'menē: (1) One of Helen’s handmaidens, 3.144. (2) A Nereïd, 18.47.

Klytaimes'tra: Wife of Agamemnon, 1.113.
Kly'tios: (1) Son of Laomedon, brother of Priam, father of Kaletor, 3.147, 15.419, 20.238. (2) Father
of Dolops (1), 11.302.
Klytome'des: Boxer defeated by Nestor in his youth, 23.634.
Kno'sos: City in Krete, 2.646.
Koi'ranos: (1) Lykian killed by Odysseus, 5.677. (2) Charioteer of Meriones, killed by Hektor,
17.610-19.
Ko'ön: Son of Antenor, killed by Agamemnon after wounding him, 11.248-63.
Ko'pai: City in Boiotia, 2.502.
Kop'reus: Herald of Eurystheus, father of Periphetes, 15.639.
Kor'inth: City in the domain of Agamemnon, 2.570.
Koronei'a: City in Boiotia, 2.503.
Koro'nos: Father of Leonteus, 2.746.
Kos: Island in the southeast Aegean, 2.677.
Koure'tes: A people at war with the Aitolians, 9.529-99.
Kran'aë: Island on the homeward route of Paris from Lakedaimon, 3.445.
Kra'pathos: Island in the southeast Aegean, 2.676.
Krei'on: Father of Lykomedes, 9.84.
Krete: Large island south of the Aegean, the domain of Idomeneus, 2.649.
Kre'thon: Achaian killed by Aineias, 5.541-60.
Krisa: City in Phokis, 2.519.

Krois'mos: Trojan killed by Meges, 15.523.
Krokylei'a: Place on or near Ithaka, 2.633.
Krom'na: City in Paphlagonia, 2.855.
Kronos: Father of Zeus, Hades, Poseidon, Hera, Demeter, 1.498, etc.; overthrown and in Tartaros,
8.479-81.
Kte'atos: Brother of Eurytos (2), q.v.; father of Amphimachos (1), 2.620-21.
Kylle'ne: Mountain bounding Arkadia to the north, 2.603.
Kymin'dis: Name for a bird, 14.291.
Kymo'dokē: A Nereïd, 18.39.
Kymo'thoë: A Nereïd, 18.41.
Kynos: City in Lokris, 2.531.
Kyparisse'eis: City near Pylos, 2.593.
Kyparis'sos: City in Phokis, 2.519.
Ky'phos: City of Gouneus, 2.748.
Kythe'ra: Island off the southern tip of Lakedaimon, 15.431.
Kyto'ros: City in Paphlagonia, 2.853.
La'as: City in Lakedaimon, 2.585.
Laër'kes: Myrmidon, father of Alkimedon, 16.197.
Laër'tes: Father of Odysseus, 2.173.
Lakedai'mon: The city, with its surrounding country, of Menelaos, in southeastern Greece, 2.581, etc.

Lampos: (1) Son of Laomedon, father of Dolops (2), 15.525-27. (2) One of Hektor’s horses, 8.185.
Lao'damas: Trojan, son of Antenor, killed by Aias, 15.516.
Laodamei'a: Daughter of Bellerophontes, mother, by Zeus, of Sarpedon, 6.197-99.
Lao'dikē: (1) Daughter of Priam and wife of Helikaon, impersonated by Iris, 3.121-24. (2) Daughter
of Agamemnon, 9.145.
Lao'dokos: (1) Son of Antenor, impersonated by Athene, 4.87. (2) Charioteer of Antilochos, 17.699.
Lao'gonos: (1) Trojan killed by Meriones, 16.603-7. (2) Trojan killed by Achilleus, 20.460.
Lao'medon: King of Troy, son of Ilos and father of Priam, Tithonos, Lampos (1), Klytios (1) and
Hiketaon, 20.236-38; who earned the hatred of Poseidon by his treatment of him and Apollo, 21.44360.
Lao'thoë: Daughter of Altes, mother, by Priam, of Lykaon (2) and Polydoros (1), 21.84-91.
La'pithai: Thessalian people led by Polypoites and Leonteus, 12.128-30.
Laris'sa: City, location unknown, allied to Troy, 2.841.
Leio'kritos: Achaian killed by Aineias, 17.344.
Le'ïtos: Leader, with Peneleos, of the Boiotians, 2.494; wounded and put out of action by Hektor,
17.601-4.
Lektos: Or Lekton, promontory of the Troad, 14.284.
Le'leges: People of Asia Minor allied to the Trojans, 10.429.
Lemnos: Island in the Aegean, west of Troy, 1.593, 2.722, etc.
Leon'teus: Leader, with Polypoites, of the Lapithai from Argissa, etc., 2.745.
Lesbos: Island and city close to the coast of Asia Minor south of Troy, 9.129, etc.

Lethos: Lord of Larissa, 2.843.
Leto: Mother (by Zeus) of Apollo and Artemis, 1.9, 21.498-504, 24.607-9.
Leu'kos: Companion of Odysseus, killed by Antiphos (3), 4.489-93.
Likym'nios: Uncle of Herakles, killed by Tlepolemos (1) who was his great-nephew, 2.663.
Lilai'a: City in Phokis, 2.523.
Limnorei'a: A Nereïd, 18.41.
Lindos: City in Rhodes, 2.656.
Lok'rians: People of Lokris, 2.535.
Lokris: District in east-central Greece, the domain of Aias the son of Oïleus, 2.527.
Lyka'on: (1) Father of Pandaros, 2.826, etc. (2) Son of Priam and Laothoë, killed by Achilleus, 21.34135.
Lykas'tos: City in Krete, 2.647.
Ly'kia: (1) District on the southern coast of Asia Minor, the domain of Sarpedon and Glaukos (1),
2.877, etc. (2) Apparently the country around Zeleia, close to Troy, home of Pandaros, 5.105, 5.173.
Lykome'des: Achaian, killer of Apisaon (2), 17.345-49.
Lykon: Trojan killed by Peneleos, 16.334-41.
Lykophon'tes: Trojan killed by Teukros, 8.275.
Ly'kophron: Achaian from Kythera, friend of Aias, killed by Hektor, 15.429-35.
Lykour'gos: (1) Son of Dryas, who assaulted Dionysos and was punished by the gods, 6.130-40. (2)
Hero who killed Areïthoös (1), 7.142-49.
Lyktos: City in Krete, 2.647.

Lyrnes'sos: City in the Troad, the home of Briseis, 2.690, etc.
Lysan'dros: Trojan killed by Aias, 11.491.
Macha'on: Son of Asklepios, fighter and healer, with his brother Podaleirios leader of the Thessalians
from Trikka and Oichalia, 2.729-33; ministers to the wounded Menelaos, 4.192-218; wounded and
put out of action by Paris, 11.504-20.
Magne'sians: People of Thessaly led by Prothoös, 2.756.
Maian'dros: River of Asia Minor emptying near Miletos (2), 2.869.
Mai'malos: Father of Peisandros (3), 16.194.
Mai'on: Kadmeian who led an ambuscade against Tydeus, 4.393-98.
Maio'nians: People from around the lake of Gyge, 2.864.
Mai'ra: A Nereïd, 18.48.
Makar: Lord of Lesbos, 24.544.
Mantinei'a: City in Arkadia, 2.607.
Maris: Lykian killed by Thrasymedes, 16.319-29.
Marpes'sa: Daughter of Euenos, wife of Idas, 9.557.
Ma'ses: City in the domain of Diomedes, 2.562.
Mastor: Father of Lykophron, 15.430.
Med'eon: City in Boiotia, 2.501.
Medesikas'te: Daughter of Priam, wife of Imbrios, 13.173.
Medon: (1) Bastard son of Oïleus (1), 13.694-97; killed by Aineias, 15.332. (2) A captain on the
Trojan side, 17.216.

Megas: Father of Perimos, 16.695.
Me'ges: Leader of the men from Doulichion, son of Phyleus, 2.627; leader of the Epeians, 13.692.
Mekis'teus: (1) Father of Euryalos, 2.566 (and one of the Seven against Thebes); a great boxer in his
youth, 23.678-80. (2) Achaian killed by Poulydamas, 15.339.
Melanip'pos: (1) Trojan killed by Teukros, 8.276. (2) Trojan, son of Hiketaon, killed by Antilochos,
15.576. (3) Trojan killed by Patroklos, 16.695. (4) A younger Achaian chief, 19.240.
Melan'thios: Trojan killed by Eurypylos, 6.36.
Melas: Son of Portheus, brother of Oineus, 14.117.
Melea'gros: Son of Oineus and prince of Kalydon, 9.529-99.
Meliboi'a: Thessalian city in the domain of Philoktetes, 2.717.
Mel'itē: A Nereïd, 18.42.
Menela'os: Son of Atreus, brother of Agamemnon, first husband of Helen, lord of Lakedaimon,
2.581-90, etc.
Menes'thes: Achaian killed by Hektor, 5.609.
Menes'theus: Leader of the Athenians, 2.552-56.
Menes'thios: (1) Achaian from Arne killed by Paris, 7.9. (2) Myrmidon leader under Achilleus,
16.173-78.
Menoi'tios: Son of Aktor (3) and father of Patroklos, 1.307, etc.
Menon: Trojan killed by Leonteus, 12.193.
Men'tes: Leader of the Kikones impersonated by Apollo, 17.73.
Mentor: Father of Imbrios, 13.171.

Meri'ones: Companion in arms of Idomeneus, one of the most prominent of the younger Achaian
warriors, charioteer and archer, 2.651, 13.244-329, etc.
Mer'meros: Trojan killed by Antilochos, 14.513.
Merops: Augur in Perkote, father of Adrestos (2) and Amphios (1), 2.831.
Mes'se: City in Lakedaimon, 2.582.
Messe'is: Wellspring in Greece, exact location unknown, 6.457.
Mesth'les: Leader of the Maionians, 2.864.
Mestor: Son of Priam, 24.257.
Metho'ne: Thessalian city in the domain of Philoktetes, 2.716.
Midei'a: City in Boiotia, 2.507.
Mile'tos: (1) City in Krete, 2.647. (2) City of the Karians, 2.868.
Minos: Son of Zeus and Europa, father of Deukalion, king of Krete, 13.450-54, 14.321-22.
Min'yai: People of Orchomenos (1) led by Askalaphos and Ialmenos, 2.511.
Minyei'os: River on the border of Nestor’s domain, 11.722.
Mnesos: Paionian killed by Achilleus, 21.210.
Moli'on: Follower of Thymbraios, killed by Odysseus, 11.322.
Moli'ones: Eurytos (2) and Kteatos (qq.v.), 11.709.
Molos: Father of Meriones, 10.270.
Morys: Trojan killed by Meriones, 14.513.
Mou'lios: (1) Epeian hero killed by Nestor in his youth, 11.739. (2) Trojan killed by Patroklos,
16.696. (3) Trojan killed by Achilleus, 20.472.

Mydon: (1) Charioteer of Pylaimenes, killed by Antilochos, 5.580. (2) Paionian killed by Achilleus,
21.209.
Mygdon: King of Phrygia, 3.186.
My'kalē: Promontory across the bay from Miletos (2), 2.869.
Mykales'sos: City in Boiotia, 2.498.
Myke'nai: Agamemnon’s capital, a few miles north of the city of Argos, 2.569, etc.
My'nes: King of Lyrnessos, 19.296.
Myri'ne: Heroine after whom a hill before Troy was named, 2.814.
Myr'midons: The people of Phthia, subjects of Peleus and led by Achilleus, 2.684, etc.
Myr'sinos: City in Elis, 2.616.
My'sians: A people living to the east of Troy and allied to the Trojans, 2.858.
Nai'ad: A well-nymph, 6.21.
Nas'tes: Leader of the Karians, killed by Achilleus, 2.867-75.
Nau'bolos: Phokian hero, father of Iphitos, 2.518.
Ne'leus: King of Pylos, father of Nestor, 11.692, etc.
Nemer'tes: A Nereïd, 18.46.
Neopto'lemos: Son of Achilleus, 19.327.
Ne'reïds: The daughters of Nereus, nymphs of the sea, 18.36-49.
Ne'reus: Aged god of the sea, father of Thetis, 1.556; and of the other Nereïds, 18.36.
Ne'ritos or Ne'riton: Mountain on Ithaka, 2.632.

Nesai'e: A Nereïd, 18.40.
Nestor: Leader of the Pylians, once a great warrior and still active as a commander and counselor,
1.247-84, etc.; father of Antilochos, 5.565; of Thrasymedes, 9.81.
Ni'obē: Heroine of Asia, whose six daughters and six sons were killed by Apollo and Artemis,
24.602-17.
Ni'reus: Leader from Syme, handsomest (next to Achilleus) of the Achaians, 2.671.
Ni'sa: City in Boiotia, 2.508.
Nisy'ros: Island near Kos, 2.676.
Noë'mon: (1) Lykian killed by Odysseus, 5.678. (2) Henchman of Antilochos, 23.612.
Nomi'on: Father of Amphimachos (2) and Nastes, 2.871.
Nysei'an: Of a mountain sacred to Dionysos, 6.133.
Ocean or Oke'anos: The waters surrounding the world and the god of those waters, 1.423, 14.201,
etc.
Oche'sios: Father of Periphas, 5.843.
Odys'seus: Son of Laërtes, lord of Ithaka and the neighboring islands, great fighter and counselor,
close friend of Agamemnon, 2.631, etc.
Oicha'lia: Thessalian city of Eurytos (1) in the domain of Podaleirios and Machaon, 2.730.
Oid'ipous: Hero of Thebes (1), 23.679. (In Homer, strictly, Oidipodes.)
Oï'leus: (1) Lokrian hero, father of Aias (2), 2.527. (2) Trojan killed by Agamemnon, 11.93.
Oi'neus: Hero of Kalydon, son of Portheus, 14.117; father of Tydeus, 5.813; of Meleagros, 5.981.
Oino'maos: (1) Achaian killed by Hektor, 5.706. (2) Trojan killed by Idomeneus, 13.506.

Oi'nops: Father of Helenos (1), 5.707.
Oi'tylos: City in Lakedaimon, 2.585.
Okal'ea: City in Boiotia, 2.501.
Olen'ian Rock: Landmark on the borders of Elis, 2.617.
O'lenos: City in Aitolia, 2.639.
Oli'zon: Thessalian city in the domain of Philoktetes, 2.717.
Oloös'son: Thessalian city in the domain of Polypoites, 2.739.
Olym'pos: Mountain north of Thessaly, the home of the gods, 1.499, etc.
Onches'tos: City of Boiotia, 2.506.
One'tor: Father of Laogonos (1), 16.604.
Opheles'tes: (1) Trojan killed by Teukros, 8.274. (2) Paionian killed by Achilleus, 21.210.
Ophel'tios: (1) Trojan killed by Euryalos, 6.20. (2) Achaian killed by Hektor, 11.302.
Opi'tes: Achaian killed by Hektor, 11.301.
Op'oeis or O'pous: City in Lokris, 2.531.
Orcho'menos: (1) City of the Minyai, adjoining the territory of the Boiotians, 2.511. (2) City in
Arkadia, 2.605.
Oreithy'ia: A Nereïd, 18.48.
Ores'bios: Boiotian killed by Hektor, 5.707-10.
Ores'tes: (1) Achaian killed by Hektor, 5.705. (2) Son of Agamemnon, 9.142. (3) Trojan killed by
Leonteus, 12.193.
Ori'on: The constellation, 18.486.

Orme'nion: Thessalian city in the domain of Eurypylos, 2.734.
Or'menos: (1) Trojan killed by Teukros, 8.274. (2) Father of Amyntor, 9.448. (3) Trojan killed by
Polypoites, 12.187.
Orne'ai: City in the domain of Agamemnon, 2.571.
Oros: Achaian killed by Hektor, 11.303.
Orsi'lochos: (1) Achaian killed by Aineias, 5.542-60. (2) Trojan killed by Teukros, 8.274.
Orthai'os: A Trojan captain, 13.791.
Or'the: Thessalian city in the domain of Polypoites, 2.739.
Orti'lochos: Father of Diokles, 5.546.
Othry'oneus: Suitor of Kassandra, killed by Idomeneus, 13.363-82.
Otos: (1) Giant who with his brother Ephialtes imprisoned Ares, 5.385. (2) Achaian from Kyllene,
killed by Poulydamas, 15.518.
Ot'reus: Lord of Phrygia, 3.186.
Otryn'teus: Father of Iphition, 20.382-84.
Ouka'legon: An elder in Troy, 3.148.
Paië'on: The healing god, 5.899.
Paio'nia: A district, its people allied to the Trojans, in what was later Macedonia, 17.350.
Pai'sos: Apparently the same as Apaisos (q.v.), 5.612.
Pallas: Epithet of Athene, 1.200, etc.
Pal'mys: A Trojan captain, 13.792.
Pammon: Son of Priam, 24.250.

Pan'daros: Son of Lykaon (1), leader of the Trojans from Zeleia, 2.824-27; but spoken of as being
from Lykia, 5.173; breaks the truce by treacherously wounding Menelaos, 4.85-140; wounds
Diomedes, 5.95-105; killed by him, 5.280-96.
Pandi'on: Henchman of Teukros, 12.372.
Pan'dokos: Trojan killed by Aias, 11.490.
Pan'opē: A Nereïd, 18.45.
Pan'opeus: (1) City in Phokis, 2.520. (2) Father of Epeios, 23.665.
Pan'thoös: An elder of Troy, 3.147; father of Poulydamas, 13.756; of Euphorbos, 16.808; of
Hyperenor, 17.19-35.
Paphla'gonēs: People of Paphlagonia on the southern shore of the Black Sea, allied to the Trojans,
2.851.
Paris: Son of Priam and Hekabē, who carried Helen from Lakedaimon, 3.15, etc. (in the Iliad more
frequently called by his other name, Alexandros).
Parrha'sia: City in Arkadia, 2.608.
Parthe'nios: River in Paphlagonia, 2.854.
Pasi'thea: One of the Graces, 14.269.
Patro'klos: Son of Menoitios, henchman and close friend of Achilleus, killed by Hektor, 1.307, etc.
Pedai'on or Pedai'os: City in the Troad, 13.172.
Pedai'os: Trojan, son of Antenor, killed by Meges, 5.69-75.
Pe'dasos: (1) Trojan killed by Euryalos, 6.21. (2) City on the river Satnioeis, 6.35. (3) Town near
Pylos, 9.152. (4) One of the horses of Achilleus, 16.152.
Peirai'os: Father of Ptolemaios, 4.228.

Pei'res: Father of Rhigmos, 20.484.
Peiri'thoös: Son of Zeus, father of Polypoites, 2.741.
Pei'ros: Thracian killed by Thoas, 4.517-38.
Peisan'dros: (1) Trojan killed by Agamemnon, 11.122-44. (2) Trojan killed by Menelaos, 13.601-19.
(3) One of the leaders of the Myrmidons, 16.193.
Peise'nor: Father of Kleitos, 15.445.
Pel'agon: (1) Follower of Nestor, 4.295. (2) Follower of Sarpedon, 5.694.
Pelas'gian: A term of disputed and apparently variable significance. Applied to Argos (2), the home
of Achilleus, 2.681; but the Pelasgians of Larissa are allied with the Trojans, 2.840-43.
Pel'egon: Father of Asteropaios, 21.141.
Pel'eus: Son of Aiakos, 21.189; father of Achilleus, 1.1, etc.; husband of Thetis, 18.85, etc.
Pel'ian: Of the spear of Achilleus, cut from Mount Pelion, 16.143.
Pel'ias: Father of Alkestis, 2.715.
Pelle'ne: Achaian city in the domain of Agamemnon, 2.574.
Pelops: Lord of Argos, father of Atreus, 2.104.
Penei'os: The chief river of Thessaly, 2.752.
Pene'leos: Leader, with Leïtos, of the Boiotians, 2.494.
Perei'a: Place where Apollo had bred the mares of Eumelos, 2.766.
Per'gamos or Per'gamon: The citadel of Troy, 4.508, etc.
Per'gasos: Father of Deïkoön, 5.535.
Periboi'a: Mother, by the river Axios, of Pelegon, 21.142.

Perie'res: Father of Boros, 16.177.
Perime'des: Father of Schedios (2), 15.515.
Per'imos: Trojan killed by Patroklos, 16.695.
Per'iphas: (1) Aitolian killed by Ares, 5.842. (2) Herald of Anchises, 17.324.
Periphe'tes: (1) Trojan killed by Teukros, 14.515. (2) Achaian from Mykenai, killed by Hektor,
15.638-52.
Perko'te: City in the Troad, 2.835.
Perrhai'bians: People from the region of Dodona, led by Gouneus, 2.749.
Perse'phonē: Wife of Hades and queen of the dead, 9.457.
Per'seus: Son of Zeus and Danaë, 14.320; grandfather of Eurystheus, 19.116.
Pe'teon: City in Boiotia, 2.500.
Pe'teos: Father of Menestheus, 2.552.
Phai'nops: (1) Father of Xanthos (2) and Thoön (1), 5.152. (2) Father of Phorkys, 17.312.
Phais'tos: (1) City in Krete, 2.648. (2) Maionian killed by Idomeneus, 5.43.
Phal'kes: Trojan killed by Antilochos, 14.513.
Pharis: City in Lakedaimon, 2.582.
Phau'sias: Father of Apisaon (1), 11.578.
Phe'geus: Trojan killed by Diomedes, 5.9-19.
Phe'ia: City on the borders of Pylos and Arkadia, 7.135.
Phei'das: Captain under Menestheus, 13.691.

Pheidip'pos: A leader of the men from Kos and the adjacent islands, 2.678.
Phe'neos: City in Arkadia, 2.605.
Phe'rai: (1) Thessalian city of Eumelos, 2.711. (2) City near Pylos, 5.543, 9.151.
Phere'klos: Builder in Troy, who made ships for Paris, killed by Meriones, 5.59-68.
Phe'res: Father of Admetos, grandfather of Eumelos, 2.763.
Pherou'sa: A Nereïd, 18.43.
Phile'tor: Father of Demouchos, 20.458.
Philokte'tes: Leader of the Thessalians from Methone and thereabouts, archer, during the action of
the Iliad ill of an infection in Lemnos, 2.716-25.
Phleg'yes: A northern people visited by Ares, 13.302.
Phoenicians: A nation, well known as seafarers, living on the Syrian coast, 23.744.
Phoi'bos: Epithet of Apollo, 1.43, etc.
Phoi'nix: (1) Son of Amyntor, a refugee befriended by Peleus, companion and tutor of Achilleus; his
story, 9.430-95. (2) Father of Europa, 14.321.
Phokis: District in central Greece, adjoining Boiotia, 2.517.
Phor'bas: (1) Man of Lesbos, father of Diomede, 9.665. (2) Father of Ilioneus, 14.490.
Phor'kys: Phrygian killed by Aias, 17.312.
Phrad'mon: Father of Agelaos (1), 8.257.
Phron'tis: Wife of Panthoös, 17.40.
Phry'gia: District east of the Troad, allied with Troy, 2.862, etc.
Phthi'a: The home of Achilleus, in southern Thessaly, 2.683, etc.

Phthi'ron: Mountain near Miletos (2), 2.868.
Phyl'akē: Thessalian city in the domain of Protesilaos, 2.695.
Phy'las: Father of Polymele, 16.181.
Phy'leus: Father of Meges, 2.628, etc.; defeated in spear-throwing by Nestor, 23.637.
Phylomedou'sa: Wife of Areïthoös (1), 7.10.
Pidy'tes: Trojan ally from Perkote, killed by Odysseus, 6.30.
Piē'ria: The region around Olympos, 14.226.
Pit'theus: Father of Aithre, 3.144.
Pityei'a: City on the Hellespont, 2.829.
Plak'os: Mountain dominating Thebe (2), 6.396.
Platai'a: City in Boiotia, 2.504.
Plei'ades: The constellation, 18.486.
Pleu'ron: City in Aitolia, 2.639.
Podalei'rios: Son of Asklepios, fighter and healer, with his brother Machaon leader of the men from
Oichalia and thereabouts, 2.732.
Podar'ge: Harpy, mother by the West Wind of the horses of Achilleus, 16.150.
Podar'gos: (1) One of the horses of Hektor, 8.185. (2) One of the horses of Menelaos, 23.295.
Podar'kes: Brother of Protesilaos, succeeding him as leader of the men from Phylake, etc., 2.703-8.
Po'des: Son of Eëtion, friend (possibly brother-in-law) of Hektor, killed by Menelaos, 17.575-81.
Poli'tes: Son of Priam, 2.791, etc.

Polyai'mon: Father of Amopaon, 8.276.
Pol'ybos: Son of Antenor, 11.59.
Polydeu'kes: Brother of Helen, 3.237.
Polydo're: Daughter of Peleus, mother, by the river Spercheios, of Menesthios, 16.173-78.
Polydo'ros: (1) Youngest son of Priam, killed by Achilleus, 20.407-18. (2) Spear-thrower defeated by
Nestor, 23.637.
Polyi'dos: (1) Trojan killed by Diomedes, 5.148-51. (2) Augur in Korinth, father of Euchenor,
13.663.
Polyk'tor: Named as his father by Hermes to Priam, 24.398.
Polyme'le: Mother, by Hermes, of Eudoros, 16.179-90.
Polyme'los: Lykian killed by Patroklos, 16.417.
Polynei'kes: Son of Oidipous, leader of the Seven against Thebes, 4.377.
Polyphe'mos: Hero of the generation of Nestor, 1.264.
Polyphe'tes: A Trojan captain, 13.791.
Polyphon'tes: Kadmeian killed by Tydeus, 4.395.
Polypoi'tes: Son of Peirithoös, leader of the Lapithai from Argissa, etc., 2.740, etc.
Polyxei'nos: A leader of the Epeians, 2.623.
Por'theus: Aitolian hero, father of Agrios, Melas, and Oineus, 14.115.
Posei'don: Son of Kronos and Rheia, so younger brother of Zeus, lord of the sea, 15.185-92;
protector of the Achaians, 13.10-124, etc.

Pouly'damas: Son of Panthoös, fighter and careful counselor, frequently opposed to the reckless
strategy of Hektor, 12.210-29, 18.249-83, etc.
Prak'tios: River in the Troad, 2.835.
Pramnei'an wine: A wine used medicinally, origin unknown, 11.639.
Priam: Son of Laomedon, king of Troy, father of Hektor, Paris, and many other children (fifty sons,
24.495), 3.161, etc.
Proi'tos: King of Ephyra, who designed against the life of Bellerophontes, 6.156-70.
Pro'machos: Boiotian killed by Akamas (1), 14.476.
Pro'noös: Trojan killed by Patroklos, 16.399.
Protesila'os: Leader of the men from Phylake, etc., first of the Achaians to land at Troy and first to be
killed, 2.695-709.
Prothoë'nor: A Boiotian leader, 2.495; killed by Poulydamas, 14.450.
Pro'thoön: Trojan killed by Teukros, 14.515.
Pro'thoös: Leader of the Magnesians from Pelion, 2.756.
Protia'on: Father of Astynoös (2), 15.455.
Proto: A Nereïd, 18.43.
Pry'tanis: Lykian killed by Odysseus, 5.678.
Ptel'eos: (1) City in the domain of Nestor, 2.594. (2) City in the domain of Protesilaos, 2.697.
Ptolemai'os: Father of Eurymedon (1), 4.228.
Pygmai'ans: That small infantry warred on by cranes, 3.6.
Pylai'menes: Lord of the Paphlagonians, killed by Menelaos, 5.576-79.

Pylai'os: Leader, with his brother Hippothoös, of the Pelasgians from Larissa, 2.842.
Pylar'tes: (1) Trojan killed by Aias, 11.491. (2) Trojan killed by Patroklos, 16.696.
Pyle'ne: City in Aitolia, 2.639.
Py'lon: Trojan killed by Polypoites, 12.187.
Py'los: The city of Nestor, with the district surrounding it, on the western coast of the Peloponnese
(south Greece: exact location disputed), 1.252, 2.591, etc.
Pyraich'mes: Paionian chief killed by Patroklos, 16.287.
Pyr'asos: (1) City in the domain of Protesilaos, 2.695. (2) Trojan killed by Aias, 11.491.
Py'ris: Trojan killed by Patroklos, 16.416.
Py'tho: Place in Phokis sacred to Apollo, later called Delphoi, 2.519, 9.404-5.
Rhadaman'thys: Son of Zeus and Europa, brother of Minos, 14.321-22.
Rhe'a, or Rhei'a: Mother, by Kronos, of Zeus, Poseidon, Hades, Hera, and Demeter, 15.187-88.
Rhe'ne: Mother, by Oïleus (1), of Medon (1), 2.728.
Rhe'sos: (1) King of the Thracians, killed by Diomedes, 10.432-502. (2) River of the Troad, 12.20.
Rhig'mos: Thracian killed by Achilleus, 20.484-89.
Rhi'pe: City in Arkadia, 2.606.
Rhodes: Island just southeast of the Aegean, its men led by Tlepolemos (1), 2.654.
Rho'dios: River of the Troad, 12.20.
Rhy'tion: City in Krete, 2.648.
Sal'amis: Island off the shore by Athens, home of Aias (1), 2.557.

Sa'mos: (1) Large island, later called Kephallenia, near Ithaka and part of the domain of Odysseus,
2.634. (2) Island, later called Samothrace, in the northern Aegean or Thracian Sea, 13.13, 24.78.
Sangar'ios: River in Phrygia, 3.187.
Sarpe'don: Son of Zeus and Laodameia, lord of the Lykians, 2.876, 6.198-99; one of the strongest
fighters on the Trojan side, kills Tlepolemos, 5.629-62; killed by Patroklos, 16.462-507.
Satni'oeis: River of the Troad, 6.34, etc.
Sat'nios: Trojan killed by Aias (2), 14.443.
Sche'dios: (1) Son of Iphitos (1) and a leader of the Phokians, 2.517; killed by Hektor, 17.304-11. (2)
Son of Perimedes, also leader of the Phokians and killed by Hektor, 15.515. (It is quite possible that
there is confusion in the tradition here, and that the same man is meant.)
Schoi'nos: City in Boiotia, 2.497.
Sel'agos: Father of Amphios (2), 5.612.
Sele'pios: Father of Euenos, 2.693.
Selle'eis: (1) River of unknown location associated with Ephyra (1), 2.659, 15.531. (2) River of the
Troad, 2.839.
Sel'loi: Prophets of Zeus at Dodona, 16.235.
Sem'elē: Mother, by Zeus, of Dionysos, 14.323-25.
Se'samos: City of the Paphlagones, 2.853.
Ses'tos: City on the European side of the Hellespont, its people allies of Troy, 2.836.
Sidon: City of the Phoenicians, 6.291.
Sik'yon: City once ruled by Adrestos (1) in the domain of Agamemnon, 2.572.
Sim'oeis: River by Troy, tributary of Skamandros, 5.774, etc.

Simoei'sios: Trojan named after the river, killed by Aias, 4.473-89.
Sin'tians: People of Lemnos, 1.594.
Sip'ylos: Mountain in Lydia, 24.615.
Sis'yphos: Hero of Ephyre (2), grandfather of Bellerophontes, 6.153.
Skai'an: Of one of the gates of Troy, 3.145, etc.
Skaman'drios: (1) Trojan huntsman and fighting man killed by Menelaos, 5.49-58. (2) Another name
for Astyanax, 6.402.
Skaman'dros: Chief river of the Trojan plain, 2.465, etc.; as a god, fights and discomfits Achilleus,
21.211-382; called also, by the gods, Xanthos, 20.74.
Skandei'a: City on Kythera, 10.268.
Skar'phe: City in Lokris, 2.532.
Skolos: City in Boiotia, 2.497.
Sky'ros: Island off Euboia, 9.668, 19.332.
Smin'theus: Epithet of Apollo, 1.39.
Sokos: Trojan killed by Odysseus, but only after wounding and nearly killing him, 11.427-55.
Sol'ymoi: Tribe in Asia Minor; Bellerophontes fought against them, 6.184-85.
Spar'ta: The same as Lakedaimon (q.v.) except that the name Sparta applies only to the city,
Lakedaimon to the district as well, 2.582, etc.
Spei'o: A Nereïd, 18.40.
Sperchei'os: River running through the domain of Peleus and Achilleus, 16.174, etc.
Sphe'los: Father of Iasos, 15.338.

Sten'tor: Achaian with a big voice, impersonated by Hera, 5.785.
Sthenela'os: Trojan killed by Patroklos, 16.586.
Sthen'elos: (1) Son of Kapaneus, leader, with Diomedes and Euryalos, of the men of Argos (1),
2.563-64; companion in arms and charioteer of Diomedes, 5.108, etc. (2) Father of Eurystheus,
19.116, 19.123.
Sti'chios: A leader of the Athenians, killed by Hektor, 15.329-31.
Stra'tia: City in Arkadia, 2.606.
Stro'phios: Father of Skamandrios (1), 5.50.
Stympha'los: City in Arkadia, 2.608.
Sty'ra: City of Euboia, 2.539.
Styx: The river (later, at least, a river of the dead, and see 8.369) by which the gods swear, 2.755, etc.
Sy'me: Island just north of Rhodes, its people led by Nireus, 2.671.
Talai'menes: Father of Mesthles and Antiphos (2), 2.865.
Tal'aos: Father of Mekisteus (1), 2.566.
Talthy'bios: Herald of Agamemnon, 1.320, etc.
Tar'ne: City of the Maionians, 5.44.
Tar'phe: City in Lokris, 2.533.
Tar'taros: The pit of perdition, 8.13-16, 8.478-81.
Te'gea: City in Arkadia, 2.607.
Tel'amon: Father of Aias (1) and Teukros, 2.528, 8.283, etc.
Tele'machos: Son of Odysseus, 2.260.

Ten'edos: Island off the coast of the Troad, 1.38.
Tenthre'don: Father of Prothoös, 2.756.
Terei'a: Hill near the Hellespont, 2.829.
Te'thys: Wife of Okeanos, 14.201.
Teukros: Bastard son of Telamon, so half brother of Aias (1), archer and spear-fighter, 8.266-334, etc.
Teu'tamos: Father of Lethos, 2.843.
Teu'thras: (1) Achaian killed by Hektor, 5.705. (2) Father of Axylos, 6.13.
Thalei'a: A Nereïd, 18.39.
Thal'pios: Son of Eurytos (2), leader of the Epeians, 2.620.
Thaly'sias: Father of Echepolos (1), 4.458.
Tha'myris: Thracian singer ruined by the Muses, 2.594-600.
Thauma'kia: City in the domain of Philoktetes, 2.716.
Thea'no: Wife of Antenor, 5.70, etc.; priestess of Athene, 6.298-311.
Thebai'os: Father of Eniopeus, 8.120.
The'be or Thebes: (1) City of Eëtion near Troy, sacked by Achilleus, 1.366, etc. (2) City of the
Kadmeians in Boiotia, attacked by Polyneikes and his companions, 4.376-81; and taken by their
sons, 4.404-9; only the lower city remaining at the time of the Trojan War, 2.505. (3) City of Egypt,
9.381-82.
The'mis: Olympian goddess of order and custom, 15.87, 20.5.
Thersi'lochos: Paionian killed by Achilleus, 21.209.

Thersi'tes: Achaian of indefinite social and military status, ugly and scurrilous and eloquent,
squelched by Odysseus, 2.211-77.
The'seus: Hero of Athens, 1.265.
Thespei'a: City in Boiotia, 2.498.
Thes'salos: Son of Herakles, father of Antiphos (1) and Pheidippos, 2.679.
Thes'tor: (1) Father of Kalchas, 1.69. (2) Father of Alkmaon, 12.394. (3) Trojan killed by Patroklos,
16.402.
The'tis: Nereïd, given by the gods in marriage to the mortal Peleus, and by him mother of Achilleus,
1.351-457, 18.35-147, etc.
This'be: City in Boiotia, 2.502.
Tho'as: (1) Son of Andraimon, leader of the Aitolians, 2.638; one of the more important younger
chiefs, characterized, 15.281-84. (2) King in Lemnos, 14.230. (3) Trojan killed by Menelaos, 16.311.
Tho'ë: A Nereïd, 18.40.
Tho'ön: (1) Trojan killed by Diomedes, 5.152. (2) Trojan killed by Odysseus, 11.422. (3) Trojan
killed by Antilochos, 13.545.
Thoö'tes: Henchman or herald of Menestheus, 12.342.
Thrace: The seaboard and inlying territory north of the Aegean, the inhabitants called Thracians, 9.5,
10.434, etc.
Thra'sios: Paionian killed by Achilleus, 21.210.
Thrasyme'des: Son of Nestor, 9.81, etc.
Thrasyme'los: Henchman of Sarpedon, killed by Patroklos, 16.463.
Thro'nion: Lokrian city, 2.533.

Thryoes'sa: Town in Pylos by the Alpheios, 11.711.
Thry'on: City in the domain of Nestor, on the Alpheios, probably identical with the foregoing, 2.592.
Thyes'tes: Son of Pelops and brother of Atreus, 2.106.
Thymbrai'os: Trojan killed by Diomedes, 11.320.
Thym'bre: Town or village near Troy, 10.430.
Thymoi'tes: Elder of Troy, 3.146.
Tir'yns: Argive city in the domain of Diomedes, 2.559.
Ti'tanos: A place in the domain of Eurypylos (1), 2.735.
Ti'tans: The elder gods in Tartaros, 14.279.
Titares'sos: Thessalian river, tributary of the Peneios, 2.751.
Titho'nos: Son of Laomedon and brother of Priam, 20.237; husband of the Dawn, 11.1.
Tlepo'lemos: (1) Son of Herakles and leader of the men from Rhodes, 2.653-70; killed, after severely
wounding him, by Sarpedon, 5.628-69. (2) Lykian killed by Patroklos, 16.416.
Tmo'los: Mountain in Maionia, 2.866.
Tra'chis: City near the Spercheios in the domain of Peleus and Achilleus, 2.682.
Tre'chos: Aitolian killed by Hektor, 5.706.
Trik'ke: Thessalian city in the domain of Machaon, 2.729.
Tritogenei'a: Epithet of Athene, 4.515.
Tro'ad: Term used for the whole country of the Trojans, of which Troy was the capital, 6.315, etc.
Tro'ilos: Son of Priam, killed at some time before Hektor, 24.257.

Troi'zen: City on the Argive coast in the domain of Diomedes, 2.561.
Troize'nos: Father of Euphemos, 2.847.
Tros: (1) Son of Erichthonios, father of Ilos, Assarakos, and Ganymedes, thus ancestor of the kings
and princes of Troy, 20.230-40. (2) Trojan killed by Achilleus, 20.463-71.
Troy: Ilion, the city of Tros and of the Trojans, 1.128, etc.
Ty'chios: Leatherworker of Hyle, who made the great shield of Aias, 7.220-24.
Ty'deus: Son of Oineus and father of Diomedes; his genealogy and history, 14.113-25.
Typho'eus: Giant (later called Typhon) put underground in the land of the Arimoi, 2.783.
Xan'thos: (1) River of Lykia, 2.877, etc. (2) River of the Troad, also called Skamandros (q.v.), 6.4,
etc. (3) Trojan killed by Diomedes, 5.152. (4) One of Hektor’s horses, 8.185. (5) One of the horses of
Achilleus, 16.149, etc.
Zakyn'thos: Island off the western coast of Greece, part of the domain of Odysseus, 2.634.
Zelei'a: City of the Troad, its men led by Pandaros, 2.824-27.
Ze'phyros: The west wind, 9.5.
Zeus: Son of Kronos, brother and husband of Hera, most powerful of the gods, 1.5, etc.

